This is Jockel podcast number 310 with Carrie Helton and me, Jockel Willink. Good evening, Carrie. Good evening.
I went back to the living room and sat down on the couch.
Newspaper clippings, letters of recognition, and photos with important individuals were scattered across my coffee table.
The 47 years of my life were summarized in a pile of images and words. My life story stared me in the face.
One photograph in particular caught my attention.
It was one in which I was holding a single tomato in one hand and a bucket full of tomatoes in the other.
I was wearing an old blue t-shirt and a pair of shoes that were ripped.
My abuelo, Jose, and my siblings stood beside me.
My abuelo posed with his straw hat.
We were all wearing old dirty clothes.
The agricultural field seemed infinite in the background.
The color of the shirt I was wearing in the photo was the exact color of the shirt I was wearing as I gazed at the picture at that moment.
I had to smile thinking about how things in life came full circle.
I was now wearing a blue NASA polo shirt and not an old blue t-shirt.
It dawned on me that there is no secret formula or magic for making dreams come true.
The only way to make a dream come true is to have the passion, the work ethic, and the foundation of a good education
to help go from one step to the next, while pushing aside the obstacles in life.
That right there is an excerpt from a book.
The book is called Reaching For The Stars.
It was written by a gentleman by the name of Jose Hernandez, who has had an incredible voyage that led him from those fields.
Picking tomatoes as a child, an out in central California, and doing that to help pay the bills for his family.
And that journey took him all the way to man's final frontier, space aboard the space shuttle as an astronaut.
And it is an honor to have Jose with us here tonight to share his story with us and also share some of the lessons that he learned along the way.
It's great honor. Jose, thank you for joining us.
Thank you for inviting me. It's pleasure to be here.
It's a wild story, and I kind of jumped to the end there, the voyage that you've been on the whole way, and the perseverance that you've shown.
There's an incredible story.
Yes, I think it just epitomizes the American story.
You know, if what's possible here in this great country of ours, of being able to reach the American dream, if you're willing to work for it.
You know, I always tell folks when I give my talks, I say, look, I'm a religious man. I'm a Catholic man, but I also know nothing's going to fall from the sky for me.
Anything I want in this world of ours, you've got to work for it. And my father taught me that at a very young age, and you saw that, fact that working with my grandfather in the fields, picking tomatoes, I mean, they taught us that work ethic.
And they said, nothing's going to come for free in this world. And I certainly believe it, and I just developed a great work ethic as a result.
Incredible. Well, you know, if we're going to go through the story, we might as well go through the story. Again, the book is called reaching for the stars.
And as I read this story, look, folks, I can't read them. I'm not going to read the whole book. That's not where we're here for, but you've got to get the book to get all the details. The level of detail that gives incredible.
It's a, there's funny parts in the book, there's sad parts in the book.
There's triumphant parts in the book, and there's failure in the book. So it covers the full spectrum of human emotions. And so if you, if you want to hear the full story, you got to get the book again. It's called reaching for the stars.
So I'm going to jump ahead a little bit. Here we go.
I was born August 7, 1962 in French Camp, California. At that time, my family lived in Stockton, California.
That is where the story of my life begins. I grew up surrounded by the love of my family and the many hardships that come along with being part of a migrant family.
My memory begins at the age of five precisely as I, the time I started school.
I remember boarding this bus to school when we were living out in the countryside near the city of Modesto.
The school located in the small town of Salida, my saying that right, Salida, Salida.
Seemed very large and was filled with students who seemed a lot bigger and older than me. The classrooms were decorated and filled with rows of shiny new desks.
The desks had built in compartments that allowed us to store pencils, crayons and papers. I could not believe I was assigned my own beautiful desk.
The phrases of gratitude were silently running through my head, but all I could do is stare at the blackboard because I did not speak the language. I tried to figure out the meaning of what was written down and drawn in color chalk.
I never dared to raise my hand to ask a question, let alone answer one.
I also never fully participated in any of the classroom kindergarten activities like singing, storytelling or playing board games.
It came as no surprise that my kindergarten teacher, whom I called La Mastra, spoke only English.
She was not sure I understood everything that was being taught, much less being said.
I remained silent with the hope of being invisible to everyone.
So, that's what a kick's off him. Going into school, no English.
And the teachers, they're just teaching an English and that's that. Exactly.
In those days, there weren't any programs like English as a second language where they put you and they try to beef up your English skills.
They just threw you in the general population and you sang or so I am young.
And that's the way it was.
Proponents that say, that's the way it should be and there's others that say, no, we need an English a second language as a program to help the weaker students.
And so, but in that particular case, I had no choice. I was just thrown in there.
What do you think? What's the way to do it?
Just straight immersion? What's your opinion?
When I went to college, I took Spanish.
Yes.
Three semesters of Spanish.
And I had a friend that's Mexican that I took Spanish with and he grew up speaking Spanish.
I got better grades than him in Spanish class and I could, I could barely, you know, I'd go to a Mexican restaurant.
I couldn't, I was worthless.
I was worthless. It's speaking.
But I learned like the rules.
Yes, exactly.
Exactly.
But I remember sometimes the teachers, they had the thought.
The professors had the thought that you, this is immersion.
And so they wouldn't speak to you in any English at all.
And I thought to myself, sometimes I, I thought to myself, I really wish I, you would answer this question for me.
Because I don't know, I'm not figuring this out.
I don't know what do you think?
I think it should be a hybrid.
Because I think there's students that will do well under any immersion program.
And then there's other students that really need that extra help so that they can get to that next level.
And I'll tell you, you know, my first experience in kindergarten was,
was just as you described it there.
But it actually occurred in three different places.
Because, you know, my story begins well before I was even born.
My parents are from the central state of Metrocán in Mexico.
And my father at the young age of 15 out of economic necessity
was a country where my family of 12 is one of the oldest boys.
He had to come and work in California as in, in, in, in, in what he knew, which was agriculture.
And he quickly set up a routine, which was common amongst folks from Metrocán,
which was, you would spend two months in southern California on terryl,
chino area picking strawberries.
Then two, and then you will move up to Selena's and you pick strawberries and lettuce.
And then you will go up to the Stockton Modesto area for five months.
There you start off with the cucumbers, then the cherries, then, then you got onions and peaches,
and you, and, and tomatoes, and then you end the harvest with the great harvest.
And then he will go back home for three months and cool his heels.
Well, when he was 19, he met my mother from the same hometown.
They got married.
And she was the, at the old ripe age of 14, you know, who should have been crime these days now, right?
But, but they got married and luckily my dad,
incorporate my mom into this nomadic lifestyle.
And of course, kids come along during the, um, marriage, right?
And there's four of us. I'm the youngest of four.
And where were you were born?
Did take it a what month he were born in?
See, I was born in August.
Okay, so you were American there.
Yes, yes, the last stop I was out and my brother was born in September.
Then I got a brother and sister born in December and they were born in Mexico.
Well, getting back to now imagine we were living this nomadic lifestyle as a kid
and Spanish is the only language I knew how to speak.
Right.
Now imagine the kindergarten.
My first kindergarten is going to, um, in the Ontario, Chino area, you know,
they, they, they stick me in there.
Just as I learned where the bathrooms at, they take me to Salinas and just as learn where those,
bathrooms are at, I'm down to my third kindergarten teacher in Stockton.
And, uh, and so you could imagine it wasn't a very conducive environment to, uh, to learn.
And that's, that's eventually why your dad decided to stay up in America, right?
Yes, yes, is my fact, um, in the second, um, and remember,
my me to, to say some about my teacher at the end when we blast off and all that,
I always forget to tell that part of the story, which is pretty cool.
But, but, but, uh, it wasn't until I was in the second grade in the second grade,
we were in our last stop in Stockton.
And my dad gets up in the morning about a week, a week before, um, a week before we go to Mexico.
He makes the, what we call the grananuncio, the big announcement.
And the big announcement was he would get up and say, kids,
we're going to Mexico next week, talk to your teachers and get three months worth of homework.
Why three months?
Because that's what we stayed over there.
And my father, my parents didn't put us in school over there because, uh,
uh, Christmas vacation came along in all that and they said, no, no, no, no, no, no.
You guys are going to self study.
And so my mom would wake us up every morning in my grandma's house.
Uh, we would go to the kitchen.
They would give us a cup of hot chocolate piece of French bread.
From eight in the morning, the 12 all four of us will be doing our homework.
Yeah, the homework was stained of chocolate, but we got it done.
And, uh, and, and so, in the second grade,
when he told us to do that, to get the homework,
I went to my second grade teacher, Miss Young.
And, uh, man, she was a, you know, second grade.
Who's your first crush, you know?
Yeah, guilty as charge, you know,
Do you remind me it was me and Miss Young, you know?
And, and, and, and, and I remember, um, she was tall, young, uh,
Asian and black, long black hair, and tall, relatively to a second grade.
Now I see her supporting the short, but she was tall back then.
And, um, and I asked her for for the, for the, for my homework.
And she looked at me with this frustrated look and said,
you tell your parents I'm going to come home and talk to them.
And that's when Miss Young came and convinced my parents that
we needed to stay in one place.
And, uh, and, and that's what sort of changed the whole dynamics,
the whole direction of our family.
And I love to tell the story to educators, because, uh, you know,
I tell them, hey, I know you feel like you're not making a difference.
Uh, but let me tell you, one little thing my teacher did
that changed the trajectory of a whole family.
And I tell him this nice story about Miss Young.
And she actually came to your house to meet your parents.
She told them.
Yes, um, my mom, uh, when she, when she told me that she was going to come
and talk to them that evening, I went running home.
I didn't even wait for my siblings, because they were in elementary school too.
I went running home, because I, you know, I felt like Paul Riviera, right?
Teachers got me teachers coming, you know, with the lamps, you know?
And, uh, and, and, and I tell my dad and my mom about,
and my mom, of course, like any Latina woman,
instead of, uh, worrying about, because my dad first, when I told him the teacher
was coming, he started taking off his belt, because he said, you must have did something
bad.
And I kind of backtrack and convince him, I had to do with our trip to Mexico.
And my mom, different priority, she actually said, we have to sweep and
mop and make a nice dinner, uh, because the teachers coming.
And so, yeah, they pulled out all the bells and whistles when the teacher came.
I loved when visitors came to our house, because, you know,
we lived a very humble life.
I never, ever went to bed hungry.
Thanks to my parents hard work, but Malta, you man, we had our fair share of beans and rice and tortillas and salsa.
But when visitors came, the protein magically appeared in a form of nice things.
They, you know, chicken or a pork shop.
And I remember I used to get so happy when my dad would say, hey,
you know, your uncle is coming or your grandpa is coming.
Translation, we're going to have meat on the table.
But, but yes, she actually came and she convinced.
And she told a beautiful story to my dad to convince him, because my dad is a very,
well, well, well, how should I put it?
A very proud man.
And, um, and I remember after dinner, they went to the small living room.
And, um, and, um, and my dad and Miss Young,
thank my mom for the dinner after she brought coffee.
And she basically said, I didn't really come here to, uh, to have dinner,
but thank you very much.
I really came to talk to you about the education process of your four kids.
And I remember the story, because my dad and mom did not speak English at the time.
Miss Young didn't speak Spanish, so I was the official translator since she was my teacher.
And, and, and, and when she said that that she was here, uh, to talk about the education process of the four kids.
My dad immediately cut uncomfortable, because I know what's going to my dad's mind.
He was saying, it's not a complaint of one kid.
It's a complaint of four kids, you know.
And Miss Young said, saw how uncomfortable she got.
And she said, no, it doesn't, it's quite the contrary,
and I said, you know, it has to do the fact that I've had the privilege of having your four kids in my class.
And let me tell you, they all love school.
They're good students.
I said, but this nomadic lifestyle that you're living,
uh, is not helping them.
And my dad and Emily stops Miss Young says, hey, hey, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.
So it's, it's true that, uh,
my wife and I only have a third grade elementary education.
We're farm workers.
And, um, and while my kids help me in the weekends, in the fields,
and seven days a week during the summer,
whenever they're school, I said, they're either in school or they're doing their homework,
they're self-studying, as we take serious their education.
And Miss Young said, yes, but you move from,
to three different towns, three different school districts.
You know what my dad's response was?
He said, yes, but we move on Saturday.
We was just true.
We finished school on a Friday Monday.
We were in the new town, new school district,
and we were in school.
So we didn't miss a day of school. He was right about that.
And then Miss Young was, yes, but then you go to Mexico for three months.
And my dad says, yes, but they take your homework.
So in my dad's eyes, he was meeting his obligation of giving us an education.
He didn't realize that moving us around was detrimental to the process,
the educational process.
And Miss Young was clearly frustrated.
And then I watched her closely, and then she kind of smiles.
Almost as she got an idea.
And, you know, she must have studied psychology because she,
she was brilliant at it.
The first thing she does is she caters to make a decision.
She caters to my dad's ego.
She looks at Mr. Hernandez and says, Mr. Hernandez,
your kids tell me that you have many years experience in agriculture.
Said, man, I think you can be considered an expert on agriculture issues.
Oh, man, you didn't have to tell that to my dad.
My dad's touch pulling up his collar.
So, oh, yeah, I'm not sure I could be considered an expert,
but I do know a thing or two about points.
Can I help you?
And, man, Miss Young, let's out of bigger shoes.
She took the baby.
He took the baby.
And, and Miss Young said, well, yes, as a matter of fact, you can.
She said, you know, I'm going to give you a problem.
And you can tell me what happens because I think that's going to help me.
But I think it's also going to help you.
And my dad says, sure, that's what's the problem.
She goes and she says, imagine I give you a small amount of money.
Small tree in that potted plant.
I'm going to give it to you.
It's a fruit tree.
I'm a dad says, well, thank you.
She says, now, I want you to find the best ground fertile ground
dig a hole in your planet.
And you take good care of it like the expert that you are.
You're going to fertilize it, water it, everything.
You take good care of it.
My dad says, I can do that for you, Miss Young.
Absolutely.
Then she looks at him says, three months later, I want you to find another piece of
ground equally as good.
Dig a hole, transplant that tree there.
Keep taking care of him.
My dad, if puzzle looked now, says, okay.
And then Miss Young grew up very quickly says, and then another three months,
what's more every three months, I want you to transplant that tree.
Mr. Hernandez, but you're going to take good care of it.
It's going to get all the water, all the fertilizer, all the nutrients and needs
because you're the expert.
You're going to take good care of it.
Then she looks great in the eye to him and says, now, you tell me what happens
in the long run to that tree.
Oh, my dad starts thinking, start coming is must actually like he likes to.
When he's very offensive, and says, well, Miss Young, that's very easy.
He says, the tree's not going to die, but you're going to stun its growth because it's going to be weak.
And if it's a fruit tree, it probably won't even bear fruit.
Why?
Let me tell you why.
So a tree needs to be in one place so the roots can grow deep.
And the branch even raises up his hands.
So the branch is going to grow big and tall.
And he's doing this and you can count the two seconds.
Big and tall.
And then you can see his face or his forehead.
He got it.
I mean, he got it.
It took him two seconds, but he got it because he sheepishly kind of put his hand down.
And I got it because my dad's very proud, but I got to give him credit that day.
Because he could have got mad or denial or whatever.
But he actually just looked at Miss Young and said,
is that what you mean?
And Miss Young said, that's exactly what I mean.
I think my job is done here and she excused herself and she went off.
And I'll tell you, that year we still went to Mexico,
but on the way back we used to go by car and from Stockton to Metrocon is almost a three-day trip.
On the way back that year, we didn't stop in Ontario,
we kept driving north. We didn't stop in Central California,
Salinas, we kept driving north and went straight to Stockton.
From then on, that was our first and only stop.
And then our trips back to Mexico, we still went every year,
but our trips to Mexico shrank from three months to three weeks
centered around Christmas vacation and all of a sudden our education started to get traction.
And why did it happen? All because the visit of one teacher,
and this is why I always love telling this story to educators.
I said, you just never know what little sea you're going to plant that's going to give fruit
to no pun intended in terms of helping kids.
So whenever you're down and out, think of this story.
Because I'm sure there's something you've done in your career that's affected a kid.
You may not know about it, but I'm sure you've done positive
has helped a family.
Yeah, no doubt about it. That's an awesome story.
I know there's another thing you mentioned in here that had an impact on you.
I'm going to the book. It says,
Star Trek was my favorite show growing up.
My brother Chava had a toy model of the USS Enterprise Space Ship from the show,
which was my favorite toy to borrow and play with for hours and hours.
In Stockton, we spent a majority of the year.
In California, we lived in a small rented three bedroom house located on the east side of town.
It was an old house made a wood with a tile roof and had a small bathroom around dining table
and a living room with old furniture.
Although the kitchen was small, it was always stocked with the necessities
from making a delicious Mexican meal tortillas, tomatoes, peppers and onions,
the quarto or bedroom I shared with Chava and Gil had only two beds a desk and a dresser.
Our furniture was rather austere and most of the pieces were second hand.
The most luxurious item my family owned was the black and white television set.
And even that was old by normal standards.
The street we lived on reflected the humbleness of its residents.
My family included with a few exceptions.
My neighbors made a living working either in the fields or the canaries.
The canaries, process, vegetables and fruits brought directly from the fields.
This is where the tomatoes are packaged after being turned into ketchup or paste.
And where the fruits are canned to become fruit cocktail.
I came from a world bordered by limitations primarily financial ones.
Fortunately, as a child I occupied myself with something that did not require any dinner.
Because it was free.
No one knew about my special hobby because I did not talk about it.
Fueled by the scenes of Star Trek, I spent my time looking up at the sky,
especially at night.
At the time I did not know exactly what it meant.
I realized that I was a little bit more pessimmerized me.
But there was something up in the sky that fascinated me.
I spent hours in my bedroom gazing through the window and staring up at the stars.
I stared at the stars thinking those stars over there are twinkling.
And that one over there is not.
Those over there look yellow while those over there look blue.
All of them appear to be the same, but they all are so different.
So even from a young age, you were fascinated by what you were seeing up in space.
Yes, and what really helped was the fact that aside from watching the first run Star Trek series in William Chattner,
who, by the way, recently became a real astronaut, right?
He went up into space.
That's really just across the carmen line.
So he became an astronaut.
I got his wings.
But what really inspired me was after watching things like Star Trek,
our loss in space and those type of programs.
When we used to go out to the fields, it used to be in the early dawn.
It was still dark outside.
And so we would go out to the fields away from the light pollution.
And so you're in pitch dark still.
The sun hasn't come up.
It still needs 20, 30 minutes for it to come up.
I could go outside and you would go up and you let your eyes adapt.
And you start gazing.
You can see the stars so clearly.
And even clouds, like the milk, you wait those type of things.
You can make out that it was so clear.
And those are the things that really grab my imagination.
And I say, you know, one day I'm going to be after.
You have a good section here.
You learned just an awesome lesson from your dad.
You say this as I grew older.
I would learn the manus or bad habits of the other workers.
This included bending the bottom of their metal buckets inward to create less volume.
And thus appear to fill each bucket even more quickly.
That's where the cucumbers is.
I would also learn how to swiftly re-seat a bucket of pepinos to make it look more full when it was really not.
All tricks of the trade I told myself.
This was how we Hernandas kids spent our weekends and summers.
We knew that it was our response.
We knew that it was our responsibility to do.
And there was no way of getting around that.
Every morning spent in the field to promise us the same routine of going to and fro.
Picking fruits or vegetables from the ground as the rays of the hot sun hit our backs.
During one Saturday in particular, I fell over accidentally stepping on a yellow overgrown pepino that was rotten.
I remember it's rotten stench as I threw down my bucket standing there thinking,
I'm all covered in mud. I stink, I'm tired, and I'm sunburned.
My siblings continue working alongside my parents, but I'm not going to anymore.
I want to go home, watch TV and play.
I decided to quit.
I went to my father and pulled on his pant leg to tell him,
Dad, I'm tired, I want to go home.
When he heard when I told him he leaned down,
took a hold of both my shoulders and with a surprise look on his face,
asked, what's wrong?
It's something happened, are you okay?
Look at me, I'm dirty, I fell in the mud, I want to leave.
Plus, I've already made $10 for the day I cried to him.
The day's almost over he said, just keep on working, I don't want to.
Fine, he said.
Take a good look at yourself.
You don't want to see, you don't like what you see right now.
You don't like working in the fields in the hot sun or getting dirty, am I right?
Well, if you quit now, you'll be creating a pattern that is easy to conform to.
If you don't work hard in school or in life, this will be your future.
Is that what you want?
No, I answered him.
Well, then don't settle for $10.
The day is almost over, get back to work, he ordered,
with just the right balance of authority and love and his version of tough love.
What my father told me that day in the fields changed the trajectory of my life.
It turned into the speech that transcended the end of a long day of working in the field.
We would hear it when all four of us sat in the back seat of our ramshackle car.
Father would turn around to look at us before he would turn on the engine.
And he would say, so how do you guys feel right now?
We, of course, tired, sweaty, covered with mud, and we would answer accordingly.
Good, he would say, because you, kids, have the privilege of living your future right now.
Living our future right now, we would ask you, isly.
Yes, he would say, I'm not going to force you to go to school or get good grades.
But if you don't, this is the type of job you'll have for the rest of your life.
This is the future that awaits you.
So if you want to quit school right now, no problem.
I invite you to start coming to work with me every day as of tomorrow.
My father's words made me realize that if I continued going to school,
I could do whatever it was I wanted to do in life.
If I studied hard, I might one day make enough money, so my parents would no longer have to work in the fields.
To this day, I believe my father's words changed the course of my destiny, and I am so grateful to him for that.
I sometimes talk about the fact that, I think one of the hardest things for kids to do is connect what they're doing right now to their future.
I don't understand how hard they work right now is going to put them wherever they end up in the future.
And your dad made that connection loud and clear for you all did me exactly.
And he put it very well in saying you have the privilege because he said, you know, your neighbors, you know,
aren't working in the fields during the summer.
They're off goofing off and having fun.
Your friends, they're in the neighborhood, they're not doing that, but you are.
So they don't know what their future is like.
So they're happy go like a carefree and they don't care.
They'll least squat about going to school.
But you know what your future is at. Here it is. You're living it.
So you want to do this the rest of your life.
And I said, man, I don't want this.
I think I'm going to do well in school because I want something better than this.
And so, so it was a hard lesson.
I know my kid with one of my kids was telling me the other day, we were walking through our town.
And there was, you know, like a some homeless drug addicts, clearly on drugs, clearly just in a totally bad position in life.
And they were telling me that when they were little, I walked by those people and say, that's what drugs do to you.
And they were happy for that.
It's to say, I have the same tip as the type of approach your dad took.
Exactly.
Left an impression on you.
Um, so now you, I'm going to fast forward a little bit again.
You got to get the book to get the whole story. I'm skipping giant swaths of the book.
But, um, going fast forward a little bit here.
Things at school continue to get better.
Making friends became easier and speaking in glaze became less of a challenge as time passed.
I did not consider myself fluent in the language until the age of 12 on the other hand, mathematics never gave me any problems.
I had my routine down and I followed it strictly as a soldier of wood.
Every day after school I would do my homework, watch TV and then play outside the only things that differ from day to day with the questions that invaded my mind.
I made it my personal mission to track down the answers to every single query that palped into my thoughts,
constantly pursuing knowledge while satisfying my curiosity.
You were in the school, huh?
Yeah, you know what really helped was, um, my father, you know, in those days they, um,
they had the world book in psychopedia and they used to have salesmen that would come to your house and they sell them to you.
And I remember my dad, they came one day and it was expensive.
It wasn't, it was like 300 back then.
It was like 300, some odd dollars or something.
You know, my parents didn't have that kind of money.
But they bought the whole A through Z selection.
So I didn't just get like A through B.
I mean, exactly. They bought the whole thing and man, whenever I needed to find something out,
it's the good old world book in psychopedia.
I would read it.
I would even go to bathroom and take, you know, A with me or B or whatever, you know,
thumb through it as you do your business.
But, but that, you know, those little things that my father did really, really helped that.
Where do you think your father, obviously, he had this incredible grasp on the fact of how important education was?
Where do you get that from?
I think he got it from the fact that he had been working in the fields himself since he was 15.
He came even before then back at home he used to work in the fields.
And I think he realized he says, I don't want to put my kids through this.
And when he saw when he came to the states, you know, he saw what people that had an education,
what kind of jobs they have and that's what he kind of, you know, won it us.
My mother, you know, both my father and my mother had they,
if they had gotten an education, I think they would have been well-known psychologists.
Because they were like expert, expert motivators.
My mother, I remember every Friday we used to, we used to cash,
we used to get paid in the fields, they gave you cheques, paper cheques back then.
And so on Friday after work, we would go directly to a gas station,
Chevron gas station and it had a little mini-mart.
My siblings would go inside while my dad gasped up and they would buy chips and so on.
So does and I would say, hey, get me one, too, because my mom would then drag me like across the street to Bank of America to cash the cheques.
And I remember we were standing there inside the bank.
It was about four in the afternoon, hot summer day, about over a hundred outside.
And, you know, you're going to a bank nice and cool right in that air conditioning.
And so we're standing there in line and I'm mining my own business and joining the cool weather there.
And then I feel it tug on my shirt and it's my mom.
And I said, well, what's up, mom?
And she points to what obviously is the bank manager.
And she says, what you see there?
You know, it was just due to a very nice tailored suit with a nice tie and dress very nice.
And obviously he was, you know, one of the muckity mucks there in the bank, right?
And I said, why see a man?
And she says, no.
I said, I see you.
I said, look at yourself right now.
Of course, I was sweaty.
Kind of dry cake mud on my Levi's pants and tired.
It says, look at your hands.
And then I, you know, they're all dirty and everything.
I said, this is why you have to pointing to my head.
So this is why you have to work with this.
If you work with this, that's how you're going to dress.
And this is where you're going to work.
And it plays like this air conditioning inside in the shade.
But if you work with this, says your body is going to break down.
You may be able to do it for a few years, but eventually your body is going to break down.
So she would always say, oh, I, you know, you better do well in school.
So they both kind of like bombarded us from different directions.
And subtle and not two subtle ways of making sure.
She was the one that was helped us develop the study habits.
Because as soon as we came home, you know, my parents would always race from the fields back home to make sure they were home before we got home from school.
So we wouldn't find an empty house.
And my mom's routine was she would dart to the kitchen.
She would make her fresh tortillas.
The beans, rice and salsa.
And that was the bait because we would come home from school.
We would come home from school. We were hungry.
And she would sit us down and she would feed us.
But then we couldn't get up.
He says crack open your books.
Show me that you finish your homework.
Do your homework and show me you finish.
And only until then, we would be allowed to get up and go to play outside with our friends.
But she was one that instilled those study habits that, you know, came in handy once he started college.
The fact that you had that discipline of saying, hey, I got to take care of this before I go enjoy myself.
Here's another impactful moment fast forward and a little bit.
It was during that particular summer of 1969 when a major event occurred that would make a big difference in my life.
Despite the war in Vietnam, the internal conflicts in the US and the hippie movement, it was important year for humanity.
It was a year that left a strong impression on me at the tender age of seven.
On the morning of July 20th, 1969, the entire world was glued to the television set,
waiting in awe for an historic event to take place.
Man kind had managed to do the unthinkable.
A person was about to set foot on the moon.
Later that night, the first images of Neil Armstrong on the surface of the La Luna were transmitted in the households around the globe when he put his foot on the moon.
He uttered the famous line that transcended time.
That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.
When I heard these words, I felt indescribably shocked.
I was captivated by this man, by this science which left me in awe.
Absorb in the broadcast, I got up abruptly to get closer to the television screen.
I had an epiphany.
During that exact moment, I discovered what I wanted to be when I grew up, an astronaut.
And from that moment on, I was determined that absolutely nothing would get in the way of my dream.
And thus the dream was born.
There it is.
You remember watching that, huh?
Yeah, it was such a big event.
You know, I think everybody would, in the whole world,
I was watching that because it was an amazement because to think that,
you know, the Apollo rocket and the capsule,
you know, which has less computing power than your average cell phone,
was able to go and using vacuum tube technology,
were able to go to the surface of the moon,
send a couple of humans down there and then bring them back home safe and sound.
I mean, it was just amazing.
It was like start track going live.
You know, so I was just amazing.
That was, you know, this is, this is what I want to be.
Another, you're parents are getting a lot of credit.
A lot of credit today.
Here's another little point where they get a ton of credit.
The only people I did share this dream with were my parents and to my pleasant surprise.
They offered me with words of encouragement.
My father sat me down at the same kitchen table where my mother made us do our homework every day and offered me a few words of advice.
He said, if I followed his recipe, I could do anything that I wanted to,
when I grew up because we lived in the United States.
He explained to me that my siblings and I had the opportunity to live the American dream.
Looking at me very seriously, he said,
first identify what you want to be when you grow up.
Second, know how far you are from your goal.
Third, draw yourself a road map that gives you all the steps it will take to get there.
Fourth, get yourself a good education.
Fifth and finally apply the same work ethic that you have in your work in the fields to your books.
And subsequently to your job, but once you graduate from college, mix all this together, Jose.
And you can be successful at anything you want to do, including becoming an astronaut.
Yep, out of the gate, I took that hook line and sinker because when you're seven and you're ten years old,
and your father tells you something, you believe it.
So if he told me, follow this recipe and you'll become an astronaut.
And I took that hook line and sinker, I said, I'm going to be an astronaut.
I really believe that at the time because I said, these are steps I can follow.
And I believe my father and this is why I love sharing that recipe because it works.
It works.
This is why I try to tell people, I said, to reach your full potential,
say, follow these five simple ingredients. Later I added a six ingredient, which is perseverance, and we'll talk about that a little later.
But I added that six ingredient, and I said, yes, follow these six ingredients.
So you know, sky is now a longer than limit.
Space is because I proved that.
You know what's amazing when you're sitting there saying that when you're a kid and your parents tell you something, you listen to them.
I mean, imagine if you're a dad would have had a different attitude.
If your dad would have said, oh, you'll never be an astronaut or you don't have the chance of doing it.
I would have never been ever what had done it.
No, because I would have believed them.
I said, you know, this is too money meant for me.
And where I'm at, social economically, you know, it's not for me.
And I would have believed it.
If I'd have were to tell me that.
And it sounded like early on, your dad, especially, was pretty adamant about you understanding that your future is your choice.
You know, and he provided the alternative right up front for you.
You experienced it, you know, working in the fields.
And then so I've got to imagine you coming to him with a choice.
You've decided, you know, at this point is a young kid that space is, is it for you, you know, being an astronaut?
So I've got to imagine, you know, he was really open to that and, you know,
and I'm certain, you know, he didn't believe I can reach it, you know, obviously, but he was so interested in us getting an education that it's like, you know,
he said, if that's what motivates him to go to college, finish high school and go to college, so be it.
I mean, this is the same thing I tell my kid, I'm my oldest kid.
He's a, he's finishing up his PhD in Purdue and aerospace engineering has two masters at bachelor's.
And, and, and, and I told him, you know, when when I hooded him for his first masters,
he was standing there in line, we had never talked about his future in terms of where he wanted to work.
And I thought he was, he was done with his first masters, but, you know, he said he was going to graduate school and he won his PhD and I said,
Oh, cool, great, that's great.
And, and, and, and, and, and, and, um, I remember I, as I, we were standing there in line,
I told him, son, why, why Purdue?
And, he said that, you know, I took a page off of your book. He says, I, um,
I made a list of all the astronauts that got selected by NASA or they graduated and guess which school has graduated the most astronauts.
I said, let me guess Purdue.
He said, yes, including Neil Armstrong.
And so, so, that's when I told him, you know, that's when I told him, I said, son,
if wanting to be an astronaut motivates you to get your PhD, I said, you go on and be an astronaut because, you know what?
Once you get that PhD, there's going to be a lot of opportunities open up for you.
You may not make it to be an astronaut, but I think you will.
I said, I think you can make it, but you're going to have so many other choices in life with two masters in PhD and bachelor's and so, so yeah, exactly.
Powerful.
Yeah.
Um, your family eventually, um, moves into a little place and eventually buys a place.
Yes.
Eventually buys a place you say here after a few more years of renting my parents would buy this house from a landlord.
I was a landlord facilitated a rent to own finance plan that I as a 12 year old kid helped translate and explained to my father.
Finally, the family had a place to call home, although our new barrio or neighborhood was far from ideal.
It had a slew of problems, just as any other barrio in south and east stocked and did.
Since we were in the old, in one of the older, more depressed neighborhood, we went as far more crime than other people who lived in the newer part of town.
I started to become more fast-formed a little bit. I started to become more social at school and in my barrio.
It was at free-mont middle school where I met Carlos and his older brother Alberto.
Another person I hung around with in school was my friend Sergio. He lived across the street for me.
The four of us were like brothers. We stick together through our adolescent years.
We were there for each other in good times and in bad times.
Do you guys know what a pocho is? Ask Carlos.
While we were sitting on the stairs in front of my house, no Sergio and I answered jointly.
A pocho is a Mexican born here in the United States who is neither a Mexican nor an American like us.
He explained. Carlos and Sergio wore those white t-shirts without sleeves, baggy gray, khaki pants,
and shiny black stacey Adams dress shoes that always look too big for their feet.
Their accessories generally consisted of a bandana either neatly folded in their back pocket
or worn around their head covering most of their forehead and a chain that hung from their belt loop.
Is it a bad thing to be a pocho? I asked.
No, but in case you haven't noticed, they don't seem to like us here in the US or in Mexico.
They will pick on us here or there. That's why we have to stick together.
If we don't, we'll be easy targets and they'll get us. Who will get us?
The Gringos and the Mexicans that have come straight from Mexico.
As I said, they don't like us. When we go to Mexico, they tell us that we're too Americanized.
Meanwhile, the Gringos calls dirty Mexicans. Either way, we can't win.
It's like we have no roots and don't belong either place.
I'm telling you, that's why we have to stick together.
Fast forward a little bit. Things around my neighborhood would never easy.
Gangs were everywhere. They congregated on a daily basis, hoping to define their territories.
Drugs like marijuana were commonly used and sold in our barrio.
Drive by shootings occurred to a lesser extent, but nonetheless kept the neighborhood on edge.
Families were dysfunctional, divided and grew apart due to inattentive parents suffering from alcoholism
or other various addictions. The children from these broken homes were quickly recruited to join gangs.
So, year after year, the membership of these groups multiplied.
I admit that it was difficult to escape that environment. Although I managed to steer clear of such activities,
I had to somewhat assimilate in order to survive.
Soon, my appearance and attitude begin to change.
As I spent more time with Carlos Alberto and Sergio, I became tougher and tougher.
Or so, I fought. I began wearing baggy pants, oversized flannel shirts and shoes that were one size too big.
I walked down the streets with an attitude while I was emulating Alberto's gestures.
My objective was to conceal the true Jose while trying to look like the rest of my peers.
I did not want to be labeled a school boy or bookworm so that I could avoid being harassed.
However, when I was in class and with my family, I was my true self. I was playful, studious and responsible.
But when I was on the streets, I was one of the homeboys, as we poachos would call ourselves.
The price of assimilation was steep. Soon, I started to deny I knew how to speak Spanish and I began paying less attention to my Mexican roots.
So, there are some alternative paths besides the one that you are trying to go down.
That's right.
These three friends of mine that are what age group, what age are you at this point?
This is a junior high.
This is a 12, 13, 14 here.
And at that point where you are, there is some point in your life that marks you that says,
Hey, I've got to change the way things are in the direction I'm heading.
Because I was doing that with my friends because you had to do that in the neighborhood.
But then you went back to school, you went back home and you tried to clean yourself up so that your parents don't see you turning into a thug, right?
Kind of thing.
And then you start thinking about, okay, I'm doing this more and more and more and more.
Am I going into deep kind of thing and you try to extract yourself from it?
And you see your buddies, they went into it.
And they went into it feet first and didn't try to come back. They embraced it and got deeper and deeper and started using drugs.
I didn't use drugs.
Then they started dealing with drugs.
And when I started seeing all these things of how it was changing them.
Because they were a good two, three months ahead of me in the process of transformation, if you will.
And I saw where they were heading.
And I saw that roadmap and I said, man, I don't want to be like them.
And little by little I just started pulling away hanging out less and less with them.
And to the point that when I got into high school, you know, well, these guys did,
made the transition to high school probably once a semester and then they just stopped going.
And I kept going through high school of course.
And so they were still my homeboys. They were still in the neighborhood.
And in a sense it was great that they were still around because, you know, that was kind of like the protection that I had in the neighborhood.
Because they knew I was, you know, everybody else knew I was associated with them.
And so no one dared mess with me because then they had to respond to these guys.
They were very good and, you know, they respected the decision I made.
And it's not like they harass me and so we're going to get you now because you left that they actually said, no, you go do it.
That's that's pretty awesome for them to be able to say that.
Because a lot of times what you find with kids is they don't want anyone to get ahead.
They don't want anyone to go further.
They'd rather just drag them back down.
And I see that in every actually I see that not just with kids.
I see that with that with humans, human beings. There's a lot of human beings that when somebody makes a move to try and elevate and try and go further and try and do more.
People discourage them and set it encouraging them.
Yeah, it's the crabs and the bucket crabs and buckets.
Yeah, one starts coming out, hey, come on down here and you get pulled back down.
So that's a real, it's a real testament to those guys that they actually instead of trying to drag you back down.
They try to lift you up and help you get out of there.
Was there anything that that happened that you saw?
Well, well, how did you recognize that the path that they were going down was not the right path?
Because you know, you write it about it in here.
Here are these guys.
You know, when you're 13, 14 years old, what do you want?
Well, you want money, you want girls.
You know, you want a cool car.
You want to be popular.
And here are these guys. Well, guess what, that money they had, you know,
They had girls.
So they kind of had the stuff that a young 14, 15 year old kid wants.
How did you realize that the path that they were going down was the wrong path?
Very easy.
We went cruising one day.
We would cruise around Stribby Park and then we got shot at that way.
I said, I don't want to be a statistic.
You know, we got shot at.
And because these guys are dealing and must have been dealing in a wrong area.
And they got shot at and I was in there.
You know, innocent bystander, but I was there.
And they were carrying, you know, and I said, man, I don't want to do this.
This is how I want to end up.
And you were able to see that luckily.
Yeah. You know, you tell, you got another story in here that's an interesting story.
It's good. It's just a good life lesson. You found a wallet with money.
Tell us that story real quick.
Yeah, yeah. We found a, I found a wallet and, and I forget how much money.
It had a significant, I had like about $6,700 in cash.
And, but it had a, it had a, you know, an ID and everything.
And I had an address and everything. And I remember I found it.
I went home to my dad, you know, and I said that.
I found this wallet.
So what's in it?
I said, there's about 600 bucks in it.
But dad looks at it first. And, you know, you see the temptation he had just as I did.
And I think more than anything he just wanted to teach me a lesson and say, you know,
if there's an owner here, we ought to try and reach out for him and try and do.
And unfortunately, he lived like an Oakland or somewhere.
He was visiting relative. So we waited like about a week or two when we had a weekend.
And then we drove to Oakland.
And we found the address and I gave it to the guy, the guy, it was an older man, you know, probably in the 60s.
And said somebody had sold something at college.
I'm not forget what he did. And he said, he had lost the whole wall.
And he thought he would never see it. He couldn't believe it.
And he gave me a $20 reward or something like that.
And I was happy I said, I did something good.
And I got 20 bucks out of it. So I think he gave my dad another 20 for the gas and stuff.
But yeah.
But teaching that lesson of doing the right thing, doing the right thing, even though it might
sting your from sting your money.
And that's the right thing to do. And that's what your dad was wanting you to know.
And that was at the same age. That was kind of that same same time for in 14th.
No, that was a little younger. Probably a little younger.
I was probably 11, 12, 10.
Still that kind of money as in 11 year old.
Yeah.
That's a lot of money.
It's a lot of money today.
Yeah.
For me.
Six hundred bucks.
That's a lot.
14, I probably would have said, you know, this is a good dumping for my car.
I'm going to get the next year or something. But now I was to young.
Fast forward a little bit.
I started my freshman year.
Fresh New Year of high school at Franklin High School at East Stockton at that time.
Frank was one of the toughest schools in Stockton with a delicate balance of Caucasian, Latino, and African American students.
Fast forward.
I found refuge in something I awkwardly called my best friend.
Math.
Yes, math made me smile.
It was fun. It remained my strongest subject as I maintained good grades throughout four years in high school.
You talk about a guy, Mr. Zendayas.
Zendayas sells and dejas.
And he told you, you were kind of talking to him about, you know, your past and your history and your ancestors.
And he said, I think you can find who you really are in the history of your ancestors country.
I know I did.
Jose, don't ever be ashamed of your culture and its traditions.
There what make up your identity. You should be proud of who you are.
Do you know why?
No, I answered attentively.
Because you belong to two countries and two cultures.
And that's a wonderful thing, not everyone is as fortunate as you are.
So that's a kind of a reversal on the photo thing where they're telling you don't speak Spanish.
Like people, like your friends, hey, we don't speak Spanish.
You were hiding the fact that you spoke Spanish.
Yes.
And I'll tell you shortly after, uh,
South and Neha's my teacher said that, you know, I think I was in a junior in high school.
And I must show you, talk about the homecoming float.
But, uh, it falls very good, uh, with this story.
Was when, um, when I was a, a junior in high school, um, you know, I started participating in student government.
Senior, I became a student by the president, but in junior, I was barely starting.
So I was part of the student council.
And so I went to the meetings.
And we were getting ready for homecoming.
And of course, every class, the senior class, the junior class, the sophomore freshman, have a float.
All right.
And they, they have a homecoming float.
And I remember ours, we, we, we wanted to build a float and everything.
And, um, and they were saying, okay, but we need a, uh, a flatbed and a truck.
Uh, does anyone have a flatbed and truck and no one had one, uh,
because my dad drove a flatbed and a truck.
So I knew I had one, right.
But I wouldn't say anything because I knew my dad, my dad is not going to lend it to us in the sense of
Drop it off somewhere where we can work and use it.
And then, uh, he'll go pick it up when we're done.
He's not like that. He's good. He's, he's the type that says, oh, yeah, you guys want to show
you can use it, but you guys come here.
So I can keep my eye on my truck and my flatbed.
So, so you have to come here.
And of course, we lived in East Stockton, worst part of Stockton.
And we lived in, uh, at the time it was a, that two bedroom, the laparated rental that we still didn't own yet.
And, um, I actually, we did on it, by then.
And so we owned it.
But it was in the worst part of Stockton. And, um, and, and so I was embarrassed to have my classmates come to my house.
Because I figured, you know, surely they live in better houses and this two bedroom they laparated, uh,
a piece of junk that we lived in, right, but that was our home.
And so I resisted it.
And we had meeting after meeting.
And then it became clear that the very last meeting, they were going to cancel the junior entry for the home
of Stockton.
Because we didn't have, we didn't have a flatbed or a truck.
I finally had a mess up.
I said, you know, I have one.
And you do great.
I said, but there's a catch and I said, what's that?
We got to build a float in my house in our front yard there at the flatbed there.
My dad wanted to take it anyway.
Oh, no worry.
We'll go and twist the address.
So I gave him the address and, you know, I'm building a float.
It's after class.
You start on the Monday because the thing is on Friday.
And so we started on Monday and, and so people came.
And I remember the first day I was kind of like embarrassed, but, you know, if they all jumped on the truck that started working on it,
then also my mom starts bringing in burritos, tacos, awafadeska.
My dad brings out the boom box and puts a music.
My brothers and sisters start helping out.
The next day, word got out.
There's good food.
The party party.
Yeah, it was a good food.
So I got bigger.
You know, by Thursday, it was like, you know, it was overflowing and it was great.
And I remember a guy, a friend of mine, comes to me and he looks at me.
And he says, man, I'm so jealous of you.
And I said, jealous of me.
And this is a Caucasian guy lived in Northside of Stockton.
Good place stuff.
He had one of those, you know, what smoking the bandit cars or trans-amps.
Trans-amps.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, you started driving and he got a new car.
And he said he was jealous of me.
And I said, dude, look what you're driving.
And your jealous of me.
And he said, yeah, I said, you know, I, um, sure I have this new car.
And I live in North Stockton.
So this is, but, you know, my parents are divorced.
I never seen my dad.
My mom's a nurse.
She works long hours.
I hardly see her.
I always come home to an empty house.
And the thing you come home to this is what I want.
And that's when I realized that, you know,
bringing in both parts of my culture to identify who Jose is.
What's the best thing to do?
That's when I stopped being embarrassed of my Mexican heritage.
That's when I embraced it.
And I said, you know, with lots of pride, yeah, I'm in Mexican American.
Because I'm able to get the best of both cultures to define who Jose is today.
And so that's, you know, after hearing sent and Mr. Sandejas's words, you know,
I put it to use and I realized I had this kind of
conclusion that said, hey, it's not bad getting the best things above cultures.
Of course, there's people that get the worst things above cultures.
And that's real bad.
You know, that's my buddies down the street, but you know, that's another thing.
It's all a little much focus on too, right?
Exactly.
You know, you focused on those positive aspects, you know,
pursued that took you places.
Yeah.
You talk about that you didn't up being the, like you said,
the student body president class president.
That's pretty cool.
You talk about the election here and stuff like that.
Fast forward a little bit.
You say one day I heard news, a news brief on the radio that said,
Costa Rican Franklin Chang Diaz, the first Latino American astronaut
candidate at NASA, makes his dream come true.
The news commentator talked in depth about Dr. Chang Diaz's struggles
and triumphs in his quest to become an astronaut.
He's a astronaut, quote, Franklin Chang was born in 1950 in San Jose, Costa Rica.
He was sent to the United States after finishing his secondary education with only
$50 to his name and without knowing a single word of English.
He recounted that all he had was a suitcase full of aspirations and,
quote, so there you had a little someone to relate to a little bit.
You were looking at him that way.
Exactly.
What I figured he was opening the road for others.
Once they selected the first Hispanic American astronaut,
I said, well, then that opens the door up for me.
And so, yes, so he was someone that really kind of put few to my added
feud with my fire of wanting to become an astronaut.
Now I said, now I know it's possible because he's living proof.
And I've re-reasonated so much because he had brown skin like I have
he spoke with an accent like I did.
And he came from very humble beginnings just like I did.
I said, well, if he can do it, why can I?
And so it empowered me.
You got into a bunch of different universities.
Get done with high school, fast forward a little bit.
You end up going to the University of the Pacific, which is up in Stockton.
Had a great engineering programs.
And it would allow you to be at home.
Yeah, I saved down room and boy.
And then I was able to work in the fall at the canary during the night shift.
I remember the first two months of school was always tough because it was August, September.
And then as you get more seniority, you're going to October, November, and the canaries.
And then you get laid off.
But I remember, you know, it's tough because you go to work at.
And that canary was only a block away, so I would walk to the canary from my house.
And I would walk in this big yellow raincoat because I worked in clean up from 10 at night to 6 in the morning.
And then I will get home, shower, eat something.
And then my classes started at 8 o'clock at EOP finished at about 2, 3.
And then did some homework.
And then fell asleep about 7 and about 930 get back up and go back to work.
On the grind.
Yeah, that's what.
You know, it was only short periods like three months kind of thing.
I have on average it was about three months.
But you know, that helped me.
The canary paid pretty well compared to field morning.
So they paid very well.
So that along with the fact that I didn't have to pay room and board,
allowed me to go to Pacific and you know pay the tuition.
My part of the tuition because I got Cal Grand, the pale Grand, those type of assistance to get to help pay for the tuition.
I got to cover this one one section because we talked about a little bit.
Talk about your friends here.
Years later after drifting apart, I would find out that he did.
This is Carlos.
He did indeed not continue his education.
He ended up doing low skilled work and low paying draw jobs.
Drugs robbed his brother Alberto of his future.
They found Alberto's lifeless body in his apartment and autopsy revealed that he died of a drug overdose.
He was probably the result of heroin or cocaine use.
As for my neighbor Sergio, he too did not have an opportunity to make something of himself.
One day years later as I was getting an award for one of my projects.
I received a call from my mother who told me that the neighbor stumbled upon his body,
which was hanging from a tree in the park.
To my knowledge, no rest were made in connection with his death.
It remains unclear as to whether it was suicide or a homicide.
I truly believe my friends were not the individuals they appeared to be.
I was a little boy who needed role models in their lives to steer them in the right direction.
If someone would have made them realize the importance of going to school or infused them with self-confidence,
their destinies would have been very different.
When I received word of their deaths, I felt impotent,
wondering perhaps if I could have done something to help them make the right decisions.
When you were talking earlier about Mrs. Young or Mrs. Young,
and it's not just educators that have the opportunity to have a huge impact on people's lives.
If you're listening to this right now, you can help so many people that you reach out,
talk to them, try and show them the right direction.
You don't have to be in a position of authority to be able to help people in the right direction.
That was the great differentiator between them and I.
You look at my parents that were involved.
They didn't know.
They didn't go to PTA meetings and none of that.
But they were involved with keeping an eye on us, making sure we wouldn't stray,
and making sure we were doing well in school, whereas with my friends,
you know, four or four, one of them, the one that lives across the street,
he, you know, his father was never there.
He would only come, he would come home like a day two days before the first swipe,
because that was when the welfare check arrived.
And he was sweet talk his wife, you know, take like 90% of the money,
disappear for the rest of the month, and then give him 10% to fend for the rest of the month
or the whole family, which was terrible.
And then on the other side, the two brothers, both the mother and father were aquahollics.
And so it was a dysfunctional family on both sides there that didn't help him.
And so when you become successful and then you hear what happens to your buddies,
you can't, you know, feel, you know, you can't help it, but to feel bad,
because you say, is there anything I could have done to have helped them along the way?
So they wouldn't have end up the way they have end up in, you know, ended up in, you know,
one old deed and another one still selling drugs on the street and the other one,
a parent suicide.
And you say, you know, you do feel guilty because you say, you know, maybe I could have done something.
But you know, who knows?
You know, speaking of people having, it tells a little bit about,
San Yota Bello.
Oh, San Yota Bello.
Yeah, okay.
Bello. Yeah.
She was a tough cookie.
She started off in, actually in, in, in, in, junior high.
And then when we went to high school, she actually transferred to the high school.
So we got double dose of her.
I don't know if it was good or bad, but the, the first dose I got of her was in junior high.
And, and she was the one that basically, remember I told you, I started to forget my Spanish and everything.
She's the one that sort of turned that around and said, no, you will learn Spanish and you will learn it in a correct manner.
You know, and all that stuff is my fact I went, I went to Waterlahara.
She was a Spanish teacher, so she set up a trip to Mexico.
And we went to a blind school and got boarded there and, and would spend like two weeks during Easter in, in, in Mexico.
And, and so she was tough as nails.
You know, she was a tough cookie, tough grader, everything, didn't cut you any slack.
And, and then in high school, she became biology teacher.
So then I went to Mexico, Baja, California, twice with her, again on Easter with the biology kids.
And we would do plant taxonomy in, in marine biology in, in Baja.
And, you know, we would, like, make corners of different quadrants.
And we would have to classify every plant in that quadrant.
So you get a good idea of what kind of vegetation existed in the Baja desert kind of thing.
And it, we were always sleeping under a tent and stuff like that.
So it was, it was, it was interesting times there.
And again, she was very, very tough on us, but, you know, that's what prepared me for college, man.
Because without her toughness, I think I wouldn't have had the mental toughness to get through physics and chemistry and calculus and all those engineering courses.
Yeah, you ran into her as you were starting university.
And, and, and one thing she told you in this is going back to the book, she said,
You're all grown up now who's a, you're about to turn 18 in a bark on a bark on your college career.
You know, I was once young and college just like you.
I know the challenges you're going to face.
The only thing I ask of you is not to forget who you are and where you come from.
Don't allow anything or anyone to deter you from your schoolwork.
She, she was staying on you.
Yeah.
She was, she was a second mother. She was exactly like a second mother.
And so she kept an eye on this.
You got a cool story in here.
I got to read this one because I, I enjoyed it.
You're checking into your first one of these classes.
Good morning class.
I'm Professor Andre's Rodriguez.
I will be teaching you physics.
Are there any questions?
Dr. Rodriguez was very short man with silver weight hair,
who always seemed to have an unlit cigar used more like a pacifier in his mouth for his hand.
He talked with a very heavy accent because of the cigar I guessed he was of Cuban descent.
Later I would find out my assumptions to be correct.
Will a syllabus be handed out?
Asked a female classmate, classmate very hesitantly?
Syllabus.
There's no need for one.
The curriculum of this class is going to be something none of you have ever seen before.
It's not going to make any sense without me personally guiding you throughout the semester.
Let's begin.
Shall we?
I shared with goosebumps when I heard him speak and what I thought was an unfriendly tone.
Looking around the classroom and seeing all the new faces once again brought me back the same feelings I had
When I was in elementary school when I was trying to figure out what the writing on the chalkboard meant.
The only difference now was that the board was plastered with symbols and numbers,
not words in a foreign language.
I did not know.
Just ten minutes into his lecture I was beginning to think that there was no way I would ever pass this class.
The chalkboard was filling up with one physics formula after another.
I might as well have been staring at Egyptian high-row-gleaf graphics.
The professor Rodriguez was talking and writing so quickly that I could barely keep up.
I just wrote down everything he wrote down as fast as I could without understanding any of it.
Any questions he asked?
No one raised a hand.
I took a deep breath and as I excelled I dared to raise my hand.
Professor Rodriguez, I really don't understand anything you just wrote on the board.
I told him some of my classmates began to laugh making me feel like an idiot for raising my hands.
Professor Rodriguez looked at me smile and asked what's your name?
Jose, I responded.
Well Jose, the reason why you don't understand anything that I wrote is because it's nonsense.
It's nonsense.
It's a joke and if you all look closely you will see that this was a lesson in disguise.
Everyone became silent, embarrassed by both their own ignorance and their fear of not speaking up.
They all seem to wish they had found themselves asking for clarification.
That's a good trick.
You referred back to someone else here.
Dr. Jones, who said, don't ever be left with any doubts or questions.
Better to be ignorant for a moment than for life.
If you don't understand something simply ask.
That's correct.
Good lesson learned right there.
Well, yeah, I figured, you know, and Dr. Jones was the director of a program there at UOP University Pacific,
the community involvement program which gave scholarships to kids from the local area to attend the University, which is a private university.
And they paid up to like 80% of your tuition.
So I remember, you know, we had like a two week orientation before school started.
And one of the things this was, this was an African American tall gentleman, Dr. Jones.
And he would always call the, you know, his kids, you know, from the program.
But he would always say, hey, you need to sit in the front of the class.
Don't sit in the back. Why get it filtered?
Sit in the front. Ask questions always do.
And it says, and then he would say, you know, Jose, you know,
you know, you were giving you a scholarship, right? I said, yeah, so, but how much are you paying a year?
So I still have to come up with about $3,000.
It says, okay, get your money's worth.
And so that's exactly what I thought of when Dr. Rodriguez was doing all this stuff.
And I was sitting there in front and writing everything.
I understand none of this crap.
Don't understand it.
And I said, man, I'm paying three grand.
I'm going to ask, I'm going to ask, I'm going to go on my money's worth.
So I asked, and I said, I don't understand it.
And that's when he said, good, I'm glad you don't get you shouldn't.
I just want to teach you guys the lessons that because we're going to go through a tough course here.
If you guys have any questions, you ask them.
So don't assume, because it's only going to get worse.
It's going to get worse if you let it pile on.
You need to understand the basics.
So ask questions.
Then he started with his lesson.
I didn't go to college until I was older than Navy sent me to college when I was 28 years old.
And I was, I would sit right in the front row.
And if a professor talked about something that I didn't understand,
I would just immediately raise my hand.
I don't understand that because I was a grown man.
You know, I didn't care what the other kids thought.
I just wanted to make sure I understood what they were putting out.
But that's something I learned in the Seal Teams.
If you're starting to learn a tactic or a technique,
and you're not getting it and you try and pretend like you get it.
It's going to catch you.
It's going to bite you.
That same thing being an astronaut is that you can't pretend.
You got to understand because you know what?
This is a little button.
It could save you or kill you.
Fast forward a little bit.
You end up with a job opportunity.
This was not only a job.
It was an opportunity.
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory is a premier research facility dedicated
to national defense and his funded through the Department of Energy.
It was located just 40 miles from my home, allowing me to commute to work.
While I was making some money to, I could not stop thinking of how I would feel on the first day
walking through those doors.
So you had this opportunity to get this job at a lab.
That's a huge opportunity.
Yes.
It's a premier national laboratory R&D in defense applications.
So what year did you do that?
Was that, did you start interning there?
Yes.
I started interning in 83 and again in 84.
And then I got offered a job in 85 career.
But I went to my master's degree and then I got hired in 87.
Four times.
Fast forward a little bit in May of 1985.
At the age of 22, I found myself dressed in a black and orange graduation gown with my standard
issued black cap ready for college graduation.
I could hear my mother's applause.
I walked across the stage and received my diploma because it was the loudest.
With my degree in hand, I stopped the show or what I had written on top of my cap before
exiting the stage.
It read Ola Mama.
It was assembled.
My gratitude for everything she had done for me for my entire life.
I remember clearly how everyone turned to look at her as she rose from her seat.
And how our crystalline eyes, which were holding back tears, met mine as she blew me a kiss.
Big day.
Yeah.
You said, I wasted no time in starting my career.
I had Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Livermore California.
This is where you decide, well, got to go through the mindset here.
I came to the conclusion that from me to flourish and successfully competing the environment,
I needed to obtain a postgraduate degree.
This realization coupled with the fact that I could not stop thinking about how I could get into the NASA
astronaut program led me to my next big decision in life to attend graduate school.
After all, Dr. Franklin Chang Diaz had a doctorate degree
and NASA chose him to go into space
so you're checking these boxes.
End up going to the University of California,
Santa Barbara.
And this was the first time you got to go to school
where all you had to do was go to school.
Exactly.
And then the first time I away from home, too.
Okay.
And so, but yes, it was the first time I had a full right
scholarship even paid for my room in board
and my only job was to go to school.
Because every other time when I was in undergrad,
I was in the canary, working restaurants,
I worked study, tutoring, doing everything.
I was always busy.
And here, the only thing I had to do was go to school.
And it was so easy.
Luxury.
It was luxury.
It was so easy because that's it.
Well, what else do I always felt when I was there?
So guilty because I said, what else do I need to do?
So no, you're all caught up.
That's luxury.
I had that kind of luxury too.
So I went to college.
The middle, I said the Navy sent me to college.
But the Navy for some reason, it was an old program.
I got commissioned as an officer before I went to college.
So then I did two years at a seal team,
then they sent me to college.
So I was an officer.
I didn't have like Johnny Kim who you know.
Johnny Kim, when he went to college, he had to do ROTC.
And we went to the same college,
University's not anybody.
He had to go to ROTC and put on his uniform
and do whatever the Navy requirements work.
Yeah.
Me, I was just just go to college.
Because the exact same as you, just get a full pay.
I was going to pay check.
My deal is even better than yours, I think.
Cause I was getting a full Navy paycheck.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I was just, I was the highest paid college freshman of all time.
It was all the way to the end.
And getting your tuition paid, right?
Yeah, and my tuition was fully paid.
Yeah, it was really good.
That's great.
But for you, going from where you all your career,
you weren't working at the cannery from 10 o'clock at night
till 6th of the morning.
And now you're just there just focused on school.
Exactly.
Exactly, it was.
Yeah.
Awesome.
You were kind of making a transition to another level.
Meanwhile, this happens.
Going back to book couple, murdered in Stockton.
Yeah.
News article.
The article confirmed that the victims were family members
from my father's side.
Dumb founded, I immediately called my parents
to inform them of the tragedy, but they already knew.
They were distraught, understandably so.
I started thinking my parents live in a neighborhood similar
to the one where my PO and Dia were just murdered.
How could I allow my own parents to continue living in such a place?
So you start feeling like you got to do some of my own parents.
Now, this is where you start getting psychological back on your parents.
That's right.
Because you knew you could just say, hey, I want to move you in with me.
Well, they're going to be resistant to the resistant
because they're used to the old neighborhood,
or used to the corner supermarket and those types of stuff.
And I knew there was going to be resistance.
Right.
But I wanted to get them out of that neighborhood,
because I said, same thing that happened to my uncles could
happen to them.
And of course, they were resistant.
So go ahead.
No, you go ahead.
What did you do?
You played a little psychological warfare on them.
Yeah.
Well, you know, I had just bought a house myself,
because I was working at Livermore.
So I bought my first three bedroom to Bath House in North Stockton,
Nice Area.
And I was living by myself, of course.
And somehow I wanted to get them to come live with me.
And of course, they resisted.
They said, no, this is our home.
This is where we belong.
This is, I said, yeah, but look what happened to Uncle Ann.
And so no, it's not going to happen to us.
And finally, I said, this is why I'm going to do, I say,
I'm going to tell mom that I really need help with the house
cleaning.
And also, I'm going to go to the pharmacy.
They'll buy me a few condoms and kind of just kind of hide them
where she could find them.
And I know she was going to clean and she's going to find them.
She's probably not going to say anything to me about them.
But I know she's going to have a conversation with dad.
And the conversation I figured, I kind of figured,
I said, she's going to say, hey, we have to move over there.
Make sure our kid doesn't make a mistake of what I found this
and that's a good Catholic parents old fashioned.
So it worked.
It worked to the tea.
It worked.
I'm next thing I know is they're packing their stuff
and they're moving over.
So yes, I did use a little bit of psychology to get them over there.
And we've never talked about it since then.
She hasn't mentioned it.
I've never mentioned it.
And it just worked.
It just worked.
Mm-hm.
Fast forward a little bit in 1991.
You lost your grandfather.
Yes.
And that was, I mean, your family was close.
Even though you spent less and less time in Mexico
as you got older, you still, I mean, this was like a huge impact
for you, huge loss.
Yes, because I grew up as a kid, I would spend three months
over there in their house with them growing up with them.
My parents were there.
My siblings were there.
Cousins would come over.
But my grandfather and grandmother were there.
And so they were like the matriap and patriarch
of the family kind of thing.
And so it was big loss when we lost them.
Yeah, because then, well, you're a Braula.
Then surely thereafter, you say this, God must not
have wanted to experience such grief for too long.
Months after my grandfather's death, her Alzheimer's
rapidly accelerated and robbed her of her last memory.
He was not long before.
She reunited with her soulmate.
That's great.
And then you lost your mother's mother as well.
And all this happened in a pretty short period.
Sure.
About three years, I lost all three of them.
My grandfather on my mother's side, he passed the way
of tuberculosis when I was about two or three years.
So he got to know me.
I don't remember him.
But he got to know who I was.
But yeah, in the short span of those, about three years,
we lost all three grandparents.
Now, as this is happening, you're still working at this lab.
And while that's going on, December 8, 1991,
the Soviet Union falls apart, which has a fixed,
I mean, global effects, obviously.
This was a superpower.
This was the fall of communism.
And you say this in the book, it was not long
after the fall of the Soviet Union.
That is the expensive Star Wars defense programs,
such as our own X-ray laser program
came up on the Congressional Budget's chopping block.
Yes.
So you were working on things that were used for defense.
The project I had worked, when I got hired as a career employee,
because I had worked at the lab already.
But when I got hired as a career employee,
they gave me a choice of about three projects.
They had a life extension program
where they extended the life of a nuclear warhead
and so you worked on how to evaluate them and certify them.
So they can stay longer on a shelf,
and we call it good in good operating order.
That was one project.
The other one was working in the National Ignition Facility
sniff, where it's nuclear fusion, 1952, X-ray beams,
creating nuclear fusion to create energy, which was pretty interesting.
But the third one was developing an X-ray laser.
This is a nuclear pumped X-ray laser,
where you have a nuclear event,
and you have a beam of focus X-rays that would be
up deployed up in space, that would be pointed to any
uncoming Soviet missiles in the event of a first strike
by the Russians.
When those missiles go X-othermic up in space,
you detonate this device, you have high energy X-ray particles
that take out the electronics package
and they flowed off harmously.
So out of all these three projects,
that's the one that interests me because we had to put it up
in space.
So I figured, I got to learn how to put it was hard
we're up in space.
I think NASA would be interested in this.
Not to mention, working on a nuclear X-ray laser.
Exactly.
And we would do our testing in Nevada,
the test side, this was one underground nuclear testing
was allowed.
And whenever they did an even nuclear event,
the labs, they would give you real estate.
They would have about 30 experiments in a nuclear event.
So they had a whole team that just dedicated
to preparing for a nuclear event,
and then they say, okay, this is your real estate,
and you would go down there and put your package
in our case, it's the X-ray itself, right next to them bomb,
and then bunch of diagnostics, fiber optics,
so that when it happens, we're able to measure the flux,
how strong those X-rays are, and how the density of it,
and all that, so we can basically measure its performance.
And that's what we were doing.
And so to me, it was great.
It was, and they would throw money at it.
So money was never an issue in terms of,
I need this, I need that, and we would not.
So it was fun times until the Soviet Union collapsed,
and then justification for grand-eels projects,
and justified it to be so, went away,
and so that's why they canceled it.
Yeah, you described this well,
when you're talking about how much money you were able to utilize,
you say, I credit the advances in defense shield projects,
such as our own X-ray laser,
as leading to the downfall of the former Soviet Union.
In short, Reagan's strategy,
that's Ronald Reagan Reagan's strategy worked.
My own conclusion leads me to believe
that an effort to keep up with the Joneses,
the Soviet Union dedicated the bulk of its budget
to similar programs, while paying less attention
to their economy and internal infrastructure.
As a result, the USSR created the perfect social and
economic storm that led to unrest and its eventual downfall.
That's great.
Fast forward a little bit.
One question started to linger in my mind
was how could we utilize to our advantage
the insight gathered from the work on the X-ray laser?
My boss and mentor, Clint Logan,
could not have agreed more.
Clint decided that mammography was the best way
to match both our skills and the tools we had developed.
That's a big leap.
We had, we also had personal motives
for improving mammography.
The wife of our leader in the X-ray laser program
had been diagnosed with breast cancer.
And I had just lost a young friend to the disease.
On many occasions, I served as an interpreter
for my 28-year-old friend and her husband
as she underwent treatment for her cancer.
I was astonished to learn that eventually,
one in eight women in the United States
acquires this horrible disease.
So you guys figured out that some of the technology
that you had used or you had invented
could actually be used in a positive way
for helping detect breast cancer.
That's correct.
The area I was in charge of for the X-ray laser
was evaluating the man-made materials
called arrow gels that were used as pads
for the X-ray laser.
And the way I evaluated them was I would X-ray them
and create images to see how homogeneous
this man-made material was so that you could match it.
Because you had to put about eight of these type of bricks
on both sides.
And you got to match the interfaces else.
They lose energy as it transfers from one interface
to the other.
And the way I did it was I did X-ray imaging,
but then I also started to fall around
with how X-rays interact with matter.
And I started writing some code called
Monicarlo 3D code analysis
that models how the X-rays react with matter.
Because some X-rays go through, some get completely absorbed
in some collide with material and create lower energy
X-rays.
And that's gathered, which is noise in the image.
And so I modeled all that.
And when the project got canceled,
this was like a neat little tool.
And so Clint, my boss, and I felt like we had an answer,
but we didn't know what the question was.
And then when all of a sudden we got sensitized
to breast cancer.
And we said, I wonder if we can redesign
the mammography machines that create these images
because they use film and they developed a film
and the doctors look at that in light table.
What we created a electronic detector
and we designed the X-ray tube to be more optimal
for human tissue diagnosis.
And we were able to create the,
what's called the first full-field digital mammography system
or earlier detection of cancer earlier
because we demonstrated that our images
had much more information content
than the film screen images.
And then we opened up a whole new area of study
called Computer-Aided Diagnosis where we were able to basically
point out possible early precursors to breast cancer,
which are microcassifications,
telly, and circumscribe lesions, asymmetric,
glandular distortion.
All those type of things that will catch the eye
of a radiologist and say, hey, maybe we should look here.
And so we put it in a smart expert system
so that the, you not only acquired the images,
but then you would put it in a super sensitive mode
and then outline the areas where the radiologist should focus
on and check out and see if it's worth going in
for a biopsy or doing something else to the patient.
So we were pretty proud.
I always tell people, you know,
when they ask me what's your proudest professional moment,
a lot of people expect me to say, oh, you know,
I flew on Space Shuttle Discovery
and went up into Space International Space Station
and all that kind of stuff I was a flight engineer,
but that's not it.
It's the fact that, you know, this device
that we created at Lawrence,
Slov'em or Lab, which was a nuclear defense lab,
yet we repurpose that technology for something,
that could work here,
for the civilians was developing an X-ray mammocry system
that detects cancer at earlier stages,
everybody knows that if you detect cancer at an earlier stage,
the greater probability of the patient to be saved occurs.
And so I'm convinced that this device
has saved hundreds of thousands of millions of life
since it's inception back in 97,98.
Oh, yeah, that's awesome.
We could just end there, I guess, right?
We could just end there, but the story goes on a little bit.
In early 1992, when I was 29 years old,
I called the National Aronotics and Space Administration
NASA to ask about the requirements to become an astronaut.
I was hoping to make myself make,
I was hoping to make what was a far-fetched dream
for many a reality for myself.
Here were the requirements.
Career in a technical field or medicine check.
Five years experience check,
highly desirable, graduate degree check.
Nothing prevented me from applying
since I met all their basic requirements.
Hence, I decided to contact NASA.
Much to my surprise, the main operator put me in contact
with astronaut selection office.
As part of the first step in the application process,
the astronaut selection office sent me a 12 page application.
I properly filled it out and mailed it back to NASA.
Fast forward a little bit.
I finally received a letter in the mail four months
after having received the acknowledgement of my application.
It read, thank you for your interest in NASA
at the moment there are many qualified applicants
applying for astronaut positions.
With NASA, unfortunately, we cannot invite you
to an interview for this selection cycle.
We encourage you to continue applying for future selection
cycles.
So denied.
The first thing, meaning, you've got denied.
I chunk here.
I got to bring a delta into the story, yes, my wife.
And you go through a really cool story about how you met,
how you got together.
It's in the book.
It's great.
Fast forward a little bit past that.
It's a delta and I dated for more than two years
before we decided to get married.
We were not in any rush to tie the knot, even though we
knew we were meant to be together six months after we got engaged.
We exchanged vows in a traditional Catholic ceremony
in low-dye California at St. Anne's Catholic Church
on the way to pick up Adela, the limousine got lost
in constant, arrived 45 minutes late to the wedding.
Talk about it, nervous groom.
I was starting to fear she'd changed her mind.
True story.
You were sweating.
I was sweating, wasn't it?
She's bailing on you.
Exactly.
Fast forward a little bit another year past.
So once again, I filled out the 12-page application
a way to for an answer.
Then after four months of waiting to hear whether or not
I had been accepted, I received another rejection letter
with the words to the effect of,
don't call us will call you.
This process of applying and being rejected repeated itself
every year while I continue to working at the laboratory,
whenever I received a rejection letter from NASA,
I would remind myself that there is more than just one
star and one goal in life.
I had no other choice but to move forward with my life.
Adelaide's positive influence helped me develop
a healthy balance between work and family,
thus I could safely avoid being consumed
with the notion of trying to become an astronaut.
She helped me cope with NASA's rejections
while encouraging me to sustain my dream.
I still wanted to become an astronaut,
but I also wanted to live and enjoy my life
on my way to becoming one.
A little year, a little over a year and a half
into our marriage, Adela announced that she was pregnant
with our first child, we experienced our first pregnancy
with all the excitement of first time parents
and all the nerves too.
The reason I wanted to highlight that part, obviously,
having to baby that's awesome.
But also, you're gonna pursue this dream.
You're getting rejected from this dream,
but you know, you use this term here
that there's more than one star and more than one goal in life.
So even though you had this goal of becoming an astronaut,
you couldn't make that the be all end all.
I couldn't let a consumer, you know.
I used it as a motivator, as a driving force,
but I didn't want it to consume my life.
I wanted to enjoy life.
And I wanted to say, look, it's okay if you don't reach your goal
because as long as you give it your best,
it's like my father would always say,
you know, shoot for the stars, you know, worse that can happen
is you're gonna be on top of the world, you know.
And so that's what I was doing.
I said, you know, the fact that I was driven to become an astronaut
and was sort of navigating my career in that sort of way,
you know, it had my career and an upward trajectory.
So it wasn't like they were competing priorities.
Yeah, well it's like your son.
They're complimenting.
It's like your son.
He wants to be an astronaut great.
Even if he doesn't get it, he's got his dang PhD.
And his old master's degree.
He got all these doors open.
Exactly.
But that's an important thing for people to remember.
Like, you know, it's great to have that big goal,
but even if you don't make that goal, look at where you got to.
Exactly.
And sometimes you are the one that changes that.
Yep.
And I'll go.
It's not the fact that you can't get there.
Sometimes the fact that you prepare yourself a certain way
opens up the doors to other opportunities
that you weren't even aware of, but all of a sudden,
hey, I can do this.
Now, go ahead and do it.
If that's what you want to do,
go ahead and do it.
It's okay to change midway as long as you're going out.
Yeah.
Fast forward a little bit during a Dallas pregnancy
with our second child.
I was traveling extensively to the former Soviet Union
for Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
in the U.S. Department of Energy.
As luck would have it,
I would found out while I was still in Siberia
that Adela had gone into labor,
given birth to our baby girl.
That's right.
I'm fast forward a little bit.
During one of my trips to Russia,
I came to an important conclusion.
Nothing in life happens or is accomplished purely by chance.
Goals and dreams are realized
through planning, perseverance, and hard work.
As I was leaning my head against the window of the state-owned car
that was taking us to our hotel,
I thought of how my childhood dream had evolved
with my graduation from college
and my work at one of the most prestigious laboratories
in the United States and the world.
It was because I worked tirelessly
that I could see my transformative effect
that my dream had on shaping each outcome in my life.
I also focused on bettering my physical strength and health,
because astronauts are susceptible to rigorous training
and medical exams before blasting off into space.
I ran a marathon almost every year I applied to NASA
with the exception of the year that I was finally selected
to become a member of the astronaut class.
Little did I know at the time I began this routine
that it would mean I would end up running 11 marathons.
Additionally, I took up flying lessons
at the Tracy Municipal Airport
and obtained my scuba certification
through the laboratories scuba diving club.
These were skills I suspected and later confirmed
were indispensable to have for an astronaut.
I learned many things during the time I spent
enhancing my skill sets, but above all,
I learned that patience really is a virtue
and it is simply the best tool to have in one's toolbox
when learning something new.
So you're doing everything you can, learn it in a fly,
learn it in a scuba dive, getting an awesome shape,
running marathons.
Yeah, and I have to, you know,
I got to give more credit to my wife,
I'll delete that, because I remember, once the,
I got rejected the sixth time and I had,
I had gotten the rejection letter and I even scrunched it up
and kind of, I was in the bathroom shaving when I got an open it
and I threw in the garbage kind and I missed the can.
Oh, and fell on the floor and I was so pissed off, I didn't rage.
I didn't even pick it up, I said, heck of that.
And my wife, I guess, was cleaning up that day
and she saw the piece of paper,
had it landed in the garbage can, she wouldn't have picked it up
and opened it, but it was on the floor, so she had, oh, what's this?
And she sees that it's another rejection letter and she sees it scrunched up,
so she's putting two and two to the, she's a pretty bright girl, so,
so she's, she knows I'm giving up.
And, and so she goes and she shows me the, the letter,
she says, what's this?
I said, you know, they keep saying that over 12,000 people apply
for only 10, 12 positions, I said, and man, they rejected me,
this is the sixth time they rejected me.
I said, I think I'm gonna give up.
I said, this, enough enough, I said, look, I got my graduate degree,
I work at the lab and all that and then she says,
so you're gonna settle for that, that, what you're gonna settle for,
she got you.
And then she not only said that, but then she said, you're gonna settle for that
and you're a quitter.
That's what got me, when she said, I'm a quitter.
I said, no, I'm not a quitter.
I said, look, you're giving up.
And she, and she looked at me and she says, you know, you better think about this,
because I know you, she says, if you give up,
you're always gonna wonder what if,
what if I had put on that, put in that seventh, eighth or ninth application.
And that's gonna naïve from the inside and you're gonna grow to be a bitter old man
and I don't want to be married to a bitter old man.
So you better think about this.
And that's when she got me thinking, I said, you know, she's, she's right.
And so what I did, what I did was that's when I started doing the things that you just
mentioned there, what I did was I, I sat down and I asked myself a fundamental question.
I said, what do these guys have that are getting selected that I don't have?
And that's when I noticed that well, they have the same education.
They're about the same age, similar experience.
But then I took a deeper dive.
And that's when I found out that they were all pilots.
So that's when I invested in my sauce, I'm gonna become a pilot.
And then another year, I found out that they were all scuba diver rated.
So man, I would drive from there, stalked in the Monterey California every weekend.
I got basic, I got advanced, I got scuba rescue master certified.
I want to make sure that's a new I knew I had a scuba dive.
So I got those under my belt and then the opportunity came full circle.
You said I was in Siberia.
The opportunity came full circle to work with the Russians.
Remember before I was working against the Russians,
protect us against the Russians now that the Soviet Union broke up,
they were asking for help to take control of their nuclear stockpile,
the newly formed Russian Federation.
And no one wanted to go and help the Russians because from the labs,
because it was tough duty.
You had to travel five, six times a year, three weeks at a time.
Just Siberia.
Two Siberian ballplaces.
You think you take that 13-hour trip to Moscow.
From New York, this is after taking a five-hour trip to San Francisco,
to New York.
Then you take that 13-hour trip to Moscow.
You think you're there.
You still got another six and a half hour flight into Siberia.
You know, I talked about being in the middle of nowhere.
And no one wanted to do it, but man,
I raised my hand and I told my boss put me in coach, I'll go.
And I said, but there's only one condition I put.
He said, what's that?
He said, well, I wanted one Russian language instructor,
because I want to learn Russian.
Because if I'm going to be doing this for a long time,
I think I shouldn't know the language.
So yeah, we got to continue education,
because you're not going to be so proud.
So I did that.
And I didn't do it because I wanted to get to know Siberia
in the middle of the winter, but I did it because I had
read in a newspaper that the US and Russia
were going to start working in the space program together.
And so I kind of put two and two together.
And I said, hey, we're going to be working with the Russians up in space.
So this is my differentiator.
This is what's going to differentiate me from the 10,000 other
at 12,000 other applicants.
Is that how many are going to be able to say they go to Russia?
They work with the Russians.
They happen to Maya Parruskiyatika.
That's the Russian.
You know, those type of things.
And so that's what when finally things got going.
And all thanks to Adelita's prodding of me and,
and getting to my pride and saying, hey, don't be a quarter.
Gotta think.
Meanwhile, it's not only she working
with psychological warfare on US, a little more after this is back to the book,
a little more after our second child, Carina joined our family, my wife,
and I found out we'd be once again, bring a life into the world.
And then halfway through my drive, fast forward, halfway through my drive,
the hospital, I received a call from my mother,
tell me to slow down and drive carefully as the new baby
and its mother were doing fine.
Mr. Notherb Earth.
Yeah.
Believe me, I never hear the end of it, especially from the kids.
My family and I began to prepare to move to Washington.
So you got a job offer up in Washington.
It's the same job from the lab, but working at DOE headquarters,
department of energy headquarters.
I started thinking about the years,
NASA denied my admission into their training program, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997.
Right before we left for Washington to start my two-year assignment,
NASA finally called offering me the invitation,
I've been waiting for my entire life, the person on the phone informed me that
out of more than 4,000 applicants, only 300 were selected for a closer look at their applications.
Out of those 300 candidates, only 100 were selected to continue
onto the final round of the selection process, and I was one of them.
We, the finalists were placed in a conference room,
where the astronaut selection manager Duane Ross explained what we would be doing during our
weeklong stay. He informed us that we were the third group of 20 candidates,
and that two more groups were visiting the Johnson Space Center in the coming weeks.
The purpose of our extensive exams was to help determine whether we met the medical requirements
for a flight assignment of the 100 finalist interviewed,
only 10 to 18 would be selected to become astronauts.
So this time you made it, little closer, little closer, little closer,
down to the final 100, exactly, from the thousands to the 100.
And they're doing medical exams, you're, you do any testing like physical testing?
Yeah, yes, they do everything from physical testing to psychological testing,
aptitude testing, and then they culminate everything with our long interview with the
whole selection committee. This, I was thinking this has to be the most highly screen job in the
world. This one of them. I can't imagine there's, I mean, I guess maybe the present United States,
although that's questionable, because they get elected. Yeah, they're getting elected. Yeah,
I can't imagine a more highly screened job than being an astronaut. I mean, just this,
the course, and again, there's a lot of good details you put in the book about this by the book.
Um, you talk about some of the stories of the other 19 individuals were truly amazing,
some were military test pilots. I thought we're helicopter pilots,
still others were medical doctors while the rest were engineers and scientists.
Eventually, Duane Ross called and gave me the news. Jose, thank you for your interest in
our program. Unfortunately, you are not selected in this interview cycle. We encourage you to
keep in mind. So close. As we'll be selecting future classes. But wait, there's more. Duane Ross
continued the phone conversation and said, Jose, if you're interested, we would like to offer you a
position as an engineer here at NASA, Johnson Space Center. However, this does not guarantee that
you will be interviewed, let alone selected during the next selection cycle. If you are interested in
applying to become an astronaut, we suggest you get more operations experience, and we believe
you can gain this type of experience and knowledge here at NASA. So they gave you a job offer,
which I was surprised when I read this. You didn't take it. Exactly. Explain why you didn't take it.
I did not take it because I had just arrived to Washington DC on my change of station
assignment from Lawrence, Livermore Lab. The lab had spent about $25,000 moving my family and I.
We had a house rented and everything, a lease signed with the job was paying for it,
but I was working at DOE headquarters, that down in downtown Washington DC. I had a commitment for
two years, and I couldn't in good conscience after being there a couple of months, saying, well,
I changed my mind. Thanks for spending that $25,000. I'm going to Houston now. I didn't want
to burn any bridges or, well, not that it was burning bridges, but more than it wasn't the right
thing to do. I had made a commitment and I wanted to fulfill it. I gave Duane Ross a call and I told
that I respectfully have to decline the offer, but I gave him my story. This is why I feel I cannot
do it and he understood. I figured he, I'm never going to hear from him again because I turned
him down, but I long behold, following a couple of years, they call again. 1992, once again, renewed my
application. By now, I felt I could fill it out with my eyes closed. For the second time, I was one of
the hundred last hundred finalists, just like the time before these lucky 100 were inviting
groups of 20 to spend a week, go through a series of medical and psychological exams interviews
and towards the various training facilities. When NASA decides to let the hundred individuals know
whether they've been selected or not, the calls to all 100 people occur within the span of a few
hours. It was rumored that if a candidate picked up the phone and the Johnson Space Center director,
who was George Abbey at the time was on the other end, it would be good news. However, it was the
astronaut selection manager, Duane Ross, or any other interview panel member, one could almost
guarantee you would be a thanks but try again, type a call. True to the rumor, when I received the
call from Duane, it was to tell me that I had been seriously considered, but it was not my year.
He then went on to suggest that again, I consider an engineering position at Johnson Space Center.
So then you go and talk to your wife, Adelita. Say, man, I talked to you for a moment. She said,
of course, something wrong. You said, I want to talk to you about something really important. I have
the thought about the whole situation with NASA a lot, but before we finalize our decision,
I want to confirm something with you. We are getting ready to head back to California and I'm
probably going to get a promotion in a nice race when I report back to work at the laboratory. That said,
I think it is best job. I think it's best for me to turn down the job offer with Nasa,
because they offered you another job. Yes. Houston is hot and muggy anyways. We'll have
less money to spend and Adelita interrupted me. Honey, if moving to Houston and working for NASA
as an engineer is what it will take to for you to make your dream come true, then we'll move to
Houston in a heartbeat boom. Yeah. And that was the deal. Yeah. So now you now you accept the job
at NASA as an engineer, as an engineer. Not as an astronaut. I'm still really cool. Yeah. I'm
in engineering and low man on the totem boom. On January 21st, 2003, we welcomed our fifth child,
second baby boy into the world. A few days earlier on January 16th, 2003 at 939 AM, the space shuttle
Columbia took off for its scheduled mission with seven astronauts on board. Columbia was scheduled
to land back on Earth on February 1st, 2003 at 715 AM. The orbital maneuvering system engines were
turned on for a D orbit burn. This burn allows the atmosphere to capture the space shuttle
Columbia and thus begin its reentry to Earth. Within minutes, the temperature center on the left
wings breaks began to show an increase in temperature. It was the first serious indication that
something was wrong. At 759 AM, the last words from the space shuttle Columbia were transmitted,
understood, but three minutes later, Columbia broke apart, raining a field of debris
across the northwest parts of Texas and Louisiana. You use a term in here. It's normalization
of deviation. And I started thinking about that term and what it means and how it obviously
impacted this horrible incident with losing the space shuttle Columbia. But it seems like something
that we are mistaken that we can do in our own lives. This normalization of deviation. Can you
talk about that a little bit? What caused the accident and what? How that idea of normalization of
deviation played into it? Sure. By that time I had been there for three years at NASA and I worked
myself up to branch chief of the materials and processes branch. And this is the engineering branch
that does the failure analysis and finds out root causes of failures of materials. And so when the
base shuttle disintegrated up in Northwest Texas, Louisiana, my group was one of the first groups
that were out there picking up the pieces. We were the ones that put the hanger and floored
outline the shuttle and brought every piece and forensic evidence and put it all together and
did the testing in terms of the materials to find out where the breach occurred. And once we were
pretty certain that that's where the breach occurred, which is an left wing leading edge, which is a
reinforced carbon carbon substrate, hard substrate. We went to Southwest Research in San Antonio
and we built a full size wing of the shuttle and then we looked at the images analysis and saw
pieces of foam that fell from the tank insulation that big orange tank center tank that fell and hit
the left wing leading edge. We found out we calculated the speed, the size of it and we replicated
that experiment at Southwest Research through a air gun fired that those pieces of foam to the wing
leading edge and recreated basically the cracks that occurred because that's the material that helps
on reentry you're up to about 2700 degrees and you know the aluminum structure inside it's
aluminum melts at about 900 degrees or so. So if there's a crack in there it's going to get in there
and it's going to affect the structural integrity of the wing and that's what caused it to snap
and create that catastrophic failure and pieces all over Northwest Texas occurred and so so during
all this time you know the president had the Columbia accident investigation board or board
form and since I was the branch chief I gave a lot of briefings of the findings you know there's
a whole team's hundreds of hundreds of people that contributed certainly not me myself but I was one of
the spokespeople in terms of telling the science part of it the results of how we what we measured
and all that and and so I got a lot of face time with a lot of people at NASA and they ended up you
know they started looking at me and trusting me and all that that that you know we came up with the
with the story of how what was the root cause of the failure which is of course the piece of
foam that did and but shortly thereafter the following year they have a selection
a selection of astronauts and I'm again one of the finalists and this time when I sit down
across the 18 people there are there you know I know more than half of them through this
accident investigation board Franklin Zhang Diaz is sitting there he's one of the guys so it's kind
of like I come home to family now before it was a complete set of strangers and now everybody
knew me I knew them and I think my work spoke for itself and I and I think that's what finally
did it but unfortunately you know we had to lose this patient of that to occur I mean then it's kind
of like a bittersweet moment for me with the normalization of deviation it explained with that
that term it's like where something goes a little bit wrong and you go you know what it's not that
big of a deal it's a normalization of of of this yes yes what happened was in in in in that sense
we've had debris fall off the tank in the past and our engineers would cry wolf
they would say hey something happened hearing we don't know what's going to happen on reentry
and you know they would do that three or four times and you did see pieces but it didn't hit anything
and so everybody so so wait so they weren't really crying wolf they were actually saying
this could cause a problem but nothing ever bad happened exactly it's nothing ever bad happened but
but but the fact is the fact is that when they cried wolf when it really did happen because they
had normalized that occurrence then the powers to be didn't put enough weight behind it to say
let's stop and let's go out do an EVA and let's inspect the wing leading edge where it hit
because that should have been the proper response all right and and that didn't happen
and so that's why I call it normalization of deviation yeah and it seems like
well the way I thought about that after reading it was thinking about just us as human beings
and our lives and we make a little mistake but we get away with it right and then you
or you go you do something that you know you shouldn't do but you get away with it you don't
you know you go need a donut well you know that's just being donut and you look up in a
month and you've had a bunch of donuts and all of a sudden you got a problem you got five pounds on
you right so we got to be careful of that idea what a travesty that was um to get to that point
you were just talking about in the fall of 2003 the selection process for the next wave of
hopeful astronauts opened once again I turned my updated application the fact that I work for NASA
did not guarantee my acceptance and they made sure I understood that when I accepted the job at
NASA in 2001 working it this is this is a beautiful point although I was anxious for the selection
process to begin I can honestly say I was content and that piece with where I was in life
if I was not selected to travel into space I would accept that since I was happy working with
NASA working at NASA made me realize that space flight involves tens of thousands of people and
that every single person is as important to the success of the mission as the seven crew members
aboard the space shuttle so you realize that and that was a yeah I worked in the trenches with
everybody and so I had the opportunity to appreciate what um with the dedication of everybody
because you know when I went to work there you know I took a 10% pay cut from Lawrence Lvmour lab
because I made too much money at the lab so you know that that was one part of my hesitation
of accepting the job that my wife convinced me and said they don't worry about it what
will make it happen and so so so from that perspective you know that's the the point
I'm getting at is that the people that work there can make more money elsewhere but they love
their job and they're doing everything possible and it only took me you know when I when I was
part of the whole process of the accident investigation and I saw the dedication of everybody
and in in previous to that when we were preparing for launches I saw the dedication of people
during their normal activities and so a lot of people always told me when I got selected in
to down the floor they said you crazy I said the base shuttle just disintegrated last year and
you just got selected aren't you afraid and I said no so because I know these people
I know there you know it's tens of thousands that we depend on but I know they're here
because they want to be here you know they're gonna dot their eyes and cross their T's
because these are dedicated folks I mean I had first-hand working with them in the trenches
and I know their dedication so I was a piece of my when I jumped into my space I was I was
more than confident things were gonna turn out good
when going for going fast forward a little bit when the whole interview process ended I along
with 99 other aspiring individuals had nothing to do but wait about four months later I received
a telephone call while working in my office frankly I was prepared for the response that I knew
all too well however this particular call did not come from the center director or the astronaut
selection manager Duane Ross it came from a senior manager Colonel Bob Cabana who is in charge
of the flight crew operations director it and who is an astronaut himself I knew that if the
center director was calling it was sure to be good news when somebody on the recommendation board
like Bob was calling I really did not know what to think I was puzzled he started the conversation
with the usual salutations and then went on to ask if I thought I was replaceable as head of the
materials and process branch my response was genuine when I told them that I thought everyone was
replaceable and that all along I had taken upon myself the responsibility to mentor and train
folks to be ready to take my place good he said how would you like to come work for the astronaut
office I quickly realized I had been accepted my whole body went numb the second I heard the good news
I did not know how I was going to be able to hold the telephone without dropping it a nervous
laugh escape my lips but no words came out as I listened to Bob continue speaking now Jose you
cannot tell anybody beyond your immediate family about this because it will be announced at a press
conference on May 6 at NASA headquarters in Washington DC warned the voice at the other
in the line I agreed said goodbye and hung up I did not tell anyone anything I still had four hours
before I could go home for work and I could not think of anything else but telling my beautiful
wife Adelaida she had to be the first to hear the good news followed by my kids and then my parents
the ten minute drive home seemed to last an eternity Adelaida Adelaida guess what our opportunity
has come finally I got accepted I'm going to be an astronaut there it is yeah
how many so how many total times did you apply it was the 12th time the 12th time 11 straight years
of rejection exactly and the 12th time there you are 12 times the charm
NASA press conference took place I still had to keep the big news a secret from all
to everyone at 11 a.m. my fellow astronauts and I were brought face to face with the press we
were all nervous and careful of our every step as we walk single file line just like my siblings
and I had when we entered that house after coming home from school when the cameras and microphones
were directed us I remember thinking to myself I'm an astronaut not a famous movie star my
palms were sweaty and there was nothing I could do about it we are introduced one by one
satcher cacity Arnold Dutton and Hernandez and cacities a seal he was in your group home yes
I'm a classmate good friend of mine that's awesome um our first big training assignment
involved traveling to the Naval Air Station in Pensacola Florida once there we spent six weeks
going to ground school being taught water survival techniques learning how to co-pilot the T-34
airplanes ground school involved not only learning basic principles of flight but also putting
those principles to work in high fidelity flight simulators probably the most interesting
activity during the six-week training program was the one where we went on submersible device
that simulated the fuselage of a helicopter this device is it actually known as the helodunker
so you when you get picked up when you get picked up for the program you're still not an astronaut
you have to make it through how long is that training program two years it's astronaut candidate program
it's two years you go through a lot of academics you go through the learning the
systems of the space shuttle 18 you know a typical airline has about eight or nine subsystems
an airline plane the space shuttle has 18 and you have to learn each one of them you have written
tests on each one of them then you got single system trainers so you master each one of them
then you got multi system trainers where they start cross-pollinating the systems and how one
system affects the other and then you've got the high fidelity motion base simulator
where then it pick up crew a four of you are in the cockpit and they draw everything about the kitchen
sink at you and you've got us you know it's either an asset run or is an orbit operations
or it's a landing and but they all fail things for you and you got to figure it out and you
got to pass all that every Friday there's a test it's like being in finals week for two continuous
years I mean pre-intense but I mean I'm sure it's similar to like for seal training as well
that that you have to go through all these things but it's not only you know it's academic mental
physical the whole combination of things where they really stress you and you know that's how they
figure out you've got the right stuff if you're able to survive that then then you move on you get your
wings and now you're eligible for a flight assignment how many people that get selected to enter the
pipeline the two-year pipeline how many people don't make it you know it's very rare that a
person doesn't make it because they've been filters oh filters they've been filtered you know the
book says 4,000 that was when it first began but when I was in and at my 12th try we were up to 12,000
this past selection run they were up to 18,000 applicants so they filter it pretty well
including the psychologists that filter everything that you know when they when they select you
you know that they have a high probability 99.9% that you're gonna make it because you've been
filtered you've been tested aptitude testing psychological testing stress testing so they have
been feeling that you're gonna make it so but you still gotta do it yeah no that's the impression
that I got when reading this also talking to Johnny Kim and is that if you get selected they
have already they've already figured out because the thing that's interesting to me is you
talk about you put in these failure failure situations over and over again and you know there's
people that panic in those situations there's people that lose their cool in those situations
there's people that don't on a handle themselves that's why I think it's interesting like
just because you became a pilot well if you panic if you become a pilot you learn to get control
of your emotions and not panic and same thing with scuba dive right scuba if you panic or your
scuba diving or something goes wrong you're gonna have some real problems so those are things
that they're looking at your application go well he's a pilot so we know he's at least going to
be able to detach from his emotions though oh he's a scuba diver so when things get into his
not claustrophilic claustrophilic claustrophilic so there's they have all these things in line so
that you can you have a very high percentage chance obviously you could have some kind of a
medical anomaly or something but that is the I do I'm I'm curious I'm sure people will
give me feedback if there's a more highly screened job that astronaut and I know you just
gave some props to seal training I could tell you there's all kinds of knuckle draggers and
see well I'm probably case case and point you know exhibit a that that what we go through is more
about just being wet cold and miserable but so fast forward a little bit once our two years
of training and testing over where you held a small graduation ceremony at Space Center Houston
can't rumble the chief of the astronaut office said a few words before presenting each of us with
a silver pin with the astronaut logo on it this is a symbol used for astronauts who have yet to travel
in the space a gold pin symbolized that an astronaut has already flown on a mission so you get the
new guy symbol exactly but it's an important symbol because you're now eligible you're in the pool
of eligible astronauts when they select a new crew you could be one selected whereas before you
were just an ascan astronaut candidate you couldn't be selected to train for a real mission
now you you're eligible to get assigned and meanwhile you talk about that you have so once you
once you become an astronaut and you're not an ascan anymore you're not used enough you're not
an ascan anywhere you're an actual astronaut then you spend 20% of your time sort of focused on
training and simulations and getting ready to fly a mission 80% of your time is work yes
and your job was a cape crusader exactly tell us about the cape crusader yeah we call them sea
squared's uh because that's a cap crusader to seize sea squared's um it was great I was a great
job you know two weeks before launch you and three other buddies as group of four astronauts
you fly over from Houston to Florida where the birds at the shuttle and you start prepping the vehicle
for launch so you start prepping the inside and doing testing with ground control and everything so
you get everything ready for the mission and then uh and then uh the day of the launch then uh
if you're the lead uh sea squared then you get the number seven on you know how you see all those
white-tick-nissians the number seven's always the astronaut there's a was there's always an astronaut
there because he's the one that buckles the there are fellow astronauts into the cockpit of every
mission and unfortunately your face is the last one they see before they go up into space yeah and so
so uh and I did that a couple times um you know I four four like uh four like two years I participated
as a sea squared but during the last part of those two years I got I was the lead uh sea squared
because that's not usually happens is the lead guy first year the new guy and then uh you're the
middle guy and then uh you're the expert and then you get a sign so you move out and then so the
middle guy becomes the expert and so that's kind of like a fifle first in first out kind of thing uh
you become an expert by the level of your experience but then you get a sign to a mission and so
that's what happened to me I participated about seven launches during those two years and the last
two I was the lead sea squared and uh it's great because you go there two weeks before your uh you're
in crew quarters uh so you you spend time with the astronauts you know they arrive about a week before
the launch so you spend time with them uh before they're gonna go off to their mission you're
uh your debriefing them on the status of the bird and how things are going and all that kind of
thing any questions they have and then uh the day of the launch you know you go out there with them
and uh you're out there strapping them in and getting them ready and then it's pretty neat because
you're also part of the rescue crew so you're in the closest the absolute closest part you can be
to watch the launch I mean you can feel the wear wear you can physically wear or you can feel
uh one of the bunkers you can feel the heat you can feel the heat of the exhaust you know because
it's so close I mean it's dangerously close you're sitting there in a bunker with uh with a bullet
proof glass or something like that you can watch how far away you think you are from it and
see I would say about a mile mile and a half maybe and you can still feel the heat or yes you can
feel you can feel the heat and uh but it's just amazing I mean that launch that you go out I mean it's
it's it's it's it's it's it's crazy when you see it take off you can't believe that big
heavy piece of metal is gonna take off and you know there it goes I was going through navy boot camp
so this is September sometime I think was either September and October of 1990 and I'm in Orlando
Florida going to boot camp and I'm standing at parade rest out on the out on the grinder and
there was a space shuttle launch and we said you know sat there and watch this thing go up into space
yeah yeah it's a quite an image is it even from that this is very cool um meanwhile
going back to the look my wife Adelita had just opened up a restaurant in Houston
down the street from the Johnson Space Center on the corner of Saturn and Gemini in the
clear lake area so she's just getting after it going and opening up in a restaurant she always
had a dream of opening up a restaurant you know she grew up in the same social economic conditions
I did their parents are from Mexico and she was born over there because she was born in November
okay there was the Christmas I was she would have been born here but she was born over there and
so she came up with the same upbringing I did and um and so her dream was always to uh own and
operate a restaurant and so once I got situated I got selected I was jogging one day and I found this
place that was for rent and I took her I was about here it's only a couple blocks from the restaurant
so we opened it it's called it was called a Tierra Luna Grill and Tierra Luna means
earth moon but my buddies astronaut buddies didn't call it earth moon because Tierra is also dirt
so they called earth moon grill so this goes dirt moon grill the eat and so that that will be
the hangout for the astronauts to eat but I remember the very first time I um I went out there
as a sea squared I literally just opened up the restaurant and so imagine this you know we get up
at three in the morning and so I go and prep the vehicle and then I go and and the astronauts
arrive about six o'clock so so we we then tuck him in and into into into the space shuttle you know
close the hatch so care of him do our leak checks everything works out we go out to the muster
area for the rescue area and um and we see him blast off and that was my first that was the first
shuttle I seen in person large and I was that close and so it takes off it takes off and
this is about nine thirty now so as soon as it takes off there's nothing for us to do so what do we
do we hop on the on the T thirty eight jet that's right there that we had flew flown in from
Mah Houston and we go back to Houston, Elintinfield and Elintinfield about six miles from Johnson Space Center
so instead of midday I say well I'm not gonna go home now so I could go back to the office so
I'm driving to the office but on the way is the latest restaurant so I want to go get some
lunch get some dirt move yeah guys go go dirt move we're gonna get some lunch and plus I want to tell
the Lita the whole exciting what I saw okay that was the first one that was the first one yeah so
I'm over there so excited and you know because I flew on the T thirty eight over the golf over
the pond landed so there I am telling the Lita you know how I you know flew the T thirty
eight jet we're back on how I saw these space shuttle you know to think that the space shuttle
I was on the space shuttle at three four five in the morning and now it's up in space and my buddies
are up in space and she's kind of like what looking at her watch and it's so she wasn't even paying
attention to that and I say exactly it's kind of like the teacher from Charlie Brown right and so I
kind of I say what's wrong it's all nothing so well you know maybe you can help me
I said you know what can I do I said do you have about an hour and a half as parents said yeah
I probably can I'm not no one's expecting you back in the office and yeah I got an hour and a half
spare so my dishwasher didn't show up today so would you mind you know this is the busy time
the busy times coming is close to lunch would you mind washing the dishes for me for just
in part an hour and just to the rush those over and I'm still in my blue flight soon yeah so
I put on an apron and I you know throw up my sleeves and there I am you know spraying beans and
rise off the plates and it's because it's a Mexican restaurant you know all this stuff and she walks in
and and I said you know I tell her I can't believe it it's a three in the morning I was in the most
sophisticated piece of machinery that humans could ever had made and then I was flying a T38
jet across the pond the couple Mexico landed it here and what am I doing right now
I'm washing ficken beans off of the plate and she just looked at me said but you're doing a
damn good job. Most over coffee dishwasher of all time probably the only but probably the only
dishwasher ever to take a T38 jet to work. Exactly and so so that's you know in Humboldt's.
Got a humble the family Humboldt's you the family yeah and I'll tell you the other story that you
you I didn't tell you also that has to do with the blue suit too is um which
was it my my fourth daughter my fourth daughter I mean the fourth in line third daughter the
youngest daughter of them all I remember when I got selected as a master. What they give you that blue
flight suit right and because it has your velcroed name tag here and everything the NASA meat ball
low low and all American flag you know that kind of stuff looks pretty cool so they give it to you
so I bring it home you know the first day they gave it to me so you know I want to try it on
make sure it's the right size they gave me and all that so I put it on but wife has it for
dress mirror in bedroom right so there I am I'm putting it on you know it has zippers galore everywhere
right zippers here is in this here is it for series ifers here zippers on the legs and zippers
down the pant legs and all that stuff so I'm playing with them getting to know and then you know
posing kind of doing my best you know hero shots kind of thing you know well I won't be true for
this kind of you know flexing kind of you know that kind of stuff and then my my five year old daughter
walks into the bedroom the doors open and and and and and she's kind of like yeah look she was young
and she was four years old because I remember she she's still had her little you know kind of the
and the Maggie pass her yeah and and she's looking at me like this and tilting her head one way tilting
her head the other way and I said oh she's gonna see me in my blue flight so she heard you know
because we've been talking that I became an astronaut and it's not she's gonna go and she's gonna hug
me and say hey puppy I'm so happy you're an astronaut and all that that's what the reaction I think
she's gonna happen once she sees me I didn't get embarrassed that she saw me posing because yeah she's
little if it was my wife I would have been a little bit but she was a little kid so you know I said hey
me how you doing and she's still turning her head and then in between the pacifier and
everything you know she points at me and she says you look like papa smart so from then on it
became whenever I want to look for my suit I say where's the smurf suit because when it's in the
laundry your son was it where's my smurf suit I need my smurf suit and so I gotta stay humble the
family of the family of the family of the family of the family of the family of the family.
Going forward a little bit you say everything seemed to be going according to how I ideally imagined it
would when I was a kid working in the ruts and groves the fields though my life seemed in order
there was a certain sense of emptiness there was no reason for me to feel this way since I had everything
I'd ever wished for out of nowhere I heard my mother's voice saying what is the purpose of having
goals in life working hard for them and achieving them if you cannot share them with others.
Even though I was sharing this moment with my family and friends I was still not completely
enjoying the moment or myself this was particularly true after coming to stock to speak at a school.
I felt the excitement my visit generated when I shared my experiences with the elementary school
children but then when I returned to Houston for training it felt as if I had never visited stockton
something was missing something that could give continuity to my visits during this time
my friends and colleagues had called or emailed me to tell me what a positive impact my
selection as an astronaut had made in the stockton community that was when the idea hit me why not
start a foundation that capitalizes on my role as an astronaut and allows me to inspire kids to do well
in school. So therefore angel pecon my saying that right and patty tow var two of my great friends
friends helped me start the legal framework work for establishing a nonprofit organization called the
Jose Hernandez reaching for the stars foundation angel and patty put together a board and helped me
define the foundation's mission which is to inspire kids to dream the impossible and to emphasize that
through education anything is possible and you say I do not believe in just pointing out a problem
and expecting the government to solve it on its own. I would like to think that this is the
responsibility of every person in the United States and that the private sector and foundations
such as mine should take some ownership for resolving this issue and that issue is getting more
kids into specifically stamps them science technology engineering and math fields yes so you got that
foundation started we'll talk a little bit about that at the end. You asked to see me sir I said
as soon as I walked into Mr. Steve Lindsay's office Mr. Lindsay was an active astronaut and the
chief of the astronaut office he was a very intelligent and slender all-American Air Force man
whose great-haired head stored a half centuries expert experience and knowledge yes Jose please
have a seat he told me politely I've called to inform you that you have been selected to form part of the
crew of the upcoming STS-128 mission in about 15 months you will be at the International Space Station
we will announce the names of the rest of the crew members at our all-hands meeting
this was something that I had long for and wished for my entire life it was the preamble
to my dream come true my dream had been actualized I found myself one step closer a significant
step closer to flying into space I thought finally my time has come the big day yes you got told
it was a go fast forward a little bit here we go as the launch data approached it became harder to sleep
I tossed and turned for hours until I was finally able to sleep soundly part of the reason I was
not a little sleep was because I kept thinking about what could possibly go wrong during the mission
what if something fails what will happen to my family how will my wife kids in parent handle it
those thoughts disrupted my tranquility luckily though as the data approach there was no time
left to worry about anything but the mission our crew began adapting to a new schedule going to
bed at 8 a.m. and waking up at 4 p.m. we were forced to shift our sleep cycle because those
were the hours we would be working on the International Space Station the close we got to launch
date the more lucid our mission objectives became our first objective was to transport a new crew
member Nicole stopped to the ISS and then return home with another astronaut Tim Copera
who had already spent more than two months in space second we had to conduct three space walks to
replace one of the stations ammonia filled tanks last we had to make an attempt taken a
Italian built portable laboratory called the multi purpose logistics module affectionate
called Leonardo we also need to bring back to earth about a ton of equipment and waste no longer
needed aboard the ISS with all that said we had only 13 days to complete our three mission
objectives so you got a schedule had an up there a heavy schedule there they're not playing around
they're going to get their money where fatten you exactly um um fast forward a little bit and I'm
going again look you got to get the book if you want to get the details of what's going on and it's
it's really fascinating to hear you know what you're thinking about as this progresses and
all the things that you're working to go on the things that you do as a team look I'm skipping
over a bunch of stuff the what you do is a team to kind of come together as a team the seven
person group that you're going to be working together is all this really incredible stuff again
I'm not doing an audio book here by the book you want to know what happens yeah there's a lot
lot your skip to oh yeah of course um so I am skipping to this part here we arrived at the launch pad
and entered the elevator to go up the hundred ninety two foot level where we had access to the
shuttles hatch a walkway allowed us to approach the white room that was next to the hatch it was in
this white room where we put on the last of our gear before entering the shuttle and getting
strapped in by the close-out crew one by one we were called in to take our seats
fast forward members of the close-out crew exited the shuttle the hatch was shut and closed it was
then that the close-out crew performed a cabin leak check and then disassembled the white room
to clear the launch pad during the last hour before launch I sat strapped to my seat on the flight
deck a million different thoughts rushed through my mind fast forward a little bit suddenly I
heard the countdown reach the nine minute hold that is when the final systems checked are
conducted by the launch control center it was almost time make your final adjustments and prepare
for takeoff we heard cabin revision complete manuals ready seconds before launch the bottom of
the launch pad was sprayed with water and it effort to cushion the noise and vibration as a result
of the power dissipated by both the three main the three shuttle main engines and the two solid rocket
boosters everything was going to plan until P. Nicolenko for launch director informed us that
the weather conditions were unfavorable 50 minutes later our mission was aboard a due to local
funder storms in the Florida skies so close so close out a few hours later a new date and time was
announced for the discovery launch Wednesday August 26th 2009 this was a 48 hour slip the mission
management team who had set the new launch date obviously did not share or optimism about the weather
improving within 24 hours as we woke up on Wednesday we found out that it was not going to happen
then either we discovered a defective fuel control valve which is being replaced at the moment
we pushed back the launch date again for 1159 on Friday August 28th 2009 NASA informed us
that reminds me of you know when you're on an airplane at the on the tarmac and first it
gets delayed and then it gets delayed again and all of a sudden they go hey we found a maintenance
problem next thing you know if like it's canceled we're deborting yeah and I was a legitimate
there was a chance that you wouldn't if this got rolled a little bit more there would be no launch at
all that's right so this the whole thing isn't jeopardy yeah but was that faulty fuel valve
would that have been a problem that's that that's you know the thing that we don't know you know
we're kind of lucky the weather was bad yeah because you don't know if that faulty fuel valve
would have acted up during that launch right and and once we shut things off and then started
back up we got that indication and we replaced it so you know it could have been that the weather
saved us could have been just let me know luckily on Friday we once again found ourselves
sitting inside discovery ready for takeoff with only two and a half hours to go I knew it was
only a matter time before a button was pushed and we would be well on our way into space the
NASA team in Houston was confident that the third time wasn't needed charm suddenly in the blink
of an eye the countdown clock was set in a motion after having reached the nine minute hold
we could hear the countdown nine minutes five seconds four three two we closed our helmet
advisers as we heard the three main engines light up shortly thereafter we felt the gentle
vibrations of the engines about two seconds later as the countdown reached zero the noise level
increased in a magnitude and the vibrations grew more violent the two solid motors attached to the
side of the external tanks it had ignited just as I thought the whole shuttle was going to shake
apart or fall to one side I felt a lot of pressure on my back I heard zero takeoff
through the corner my eye could see the tower staying behind as we lifted off we were on our way
immediately the muscle memory of our training simulations took over I quickly focused on my job as
mission specialist too which was to execute the role of a flight engineer I began reading off the
pre-determined milestones to our commander in pilot while monitoring the screens engages in the front
and above me doing sure none of them would deviate from their expected readings the most dynamic
parts of our mission were blast off in the subsequent eight and a half minute flight into space
during the latter we went from resting on the launch pad to orbiting our planet at more than 17,000
500 miles an hour at an altitude of some 280 miles two and a half minutes into our launch the two
solid rocket boosters separated and fell to the ocean about 200 miles northeast of the Kennedy
space center after the initial two and a half minutes the next six minutes became quieter and the
ride became a lot smoother when we reached eight minutes and 30 seconds into the flight we had
reached the main engine cut off this basically meant that we had reached our top speed of 11,000 or
17,500 miles an hour and it turned off our main engines the next step was for us to monitor the
separation of the external tank which was feeding our three main engines the external tank typically
ends up so high that it does not survive reentry into the atmosphere and thus disintegrates into
pieces before falling armlessly back into the ocean the shuttle usually possesses enough energy
to continue upward and when appropriate begins orbiting the planet soon after this happened to us
we approached we reached a microgravity environment and began floating in space high above the earth
our mission was well on its way we did that thing starts to rumble well how's that feel
that the exhaust that go you know I'll be honest with you jacos is that you know if there was
any piece of fear during this whole process of being an astronaut I would have to say it's
probably the first three seconds of when you reach zero and you feel the three engines light up and then
you feel the two solid rocket motors turn on come to life all of a sudden things are vibrating and
you know this is the type of stuff that can't be simulated here on earth and so you don't know
what to expect and yeah that moment you you you know the first thing I said is Jose what did you get
yourself you know but then shortly after that as the book indicates you know muscle memory takes
over and you know we've done a bunch of simulated motion-based asset runs as a crew and so I focus
on to my tassack and him you know I had the best seed in the house because I'm sitting a little
af of the two pilots the commander in the pilot Kevin Ford and my commander CJ Sturkow
great marine pilot and and and Kevin Ford is an air force pilot and I'm sitting a little
behind them in the middle so I get the panoramic view but you know of course I have to
hawk all the 10 screens of both pilots so that anything goes off nominal I peel off with the
person that owns the system and me as a flight engineer you know I'm the one that's basically
quarterbacking what the problem is diagnosing what we need to be doing and between the pilot
and I we solve or try to minimize its effect while the other pilot flies the nominal portion
of the mission and so so but nothing happened it was the best similar I always tell my commander
this was the best simulation run ever because nothing happened everything occurred as it was supposed
to occur unlike our simulations where they throw the kitchen sink out and so but man you know
words can't describe those eight and a half minutes apart flight because you know you start off
like the greatest Disneyland ride ever and and then as you as you move up the two and a half minutes
when the solid rocket boosters pop off it becomes smooth smooth the ride more quiet ride
but you start accelerating more and you start feeling the pressure against your chest so you end up
feeling about up to it goes almost up to three G's a force right on your chest and that's three G's is
about what is it three people that way exactly like you on top of you that's how three G's feel so
I at at the mark of eight and a half minutes you're ready for this to be over you're ready for
main engine cut off meco and and because when that happens you stop accelerating so that 500
pound gorilla disappears and now you're kind of loosey goosey in your seat but you got your seat belt
on but now you're in a microgravity environment orbiting earth once every 90 minutes on a continuous
base 17,000 miles an hour is 17,500 miles an hour you're traveling but because now you're not
accelerating you don't feel the G forces so now you're it's kind of like being on a plane
500 miles an hour you don't feel that you only feel the take off kind of thing and so yeah so
you know it's it's crazy because you know when you look out the window and you see the U.S. you
go off and do something for 20 minutes and now you're flying over China or Australia or over Europe
kind of thing it's it's it's it's the craziest feeling I ever had this I said wow this is
uh this is a good way to travel yeah and it's uh as you're describing that both in writing and then
you're talking you're sitting on a freaking bomb on a bomb that's what you're sitting on all that stuff
just wants to explode and it's just control yeah it's a controlled detonation yeah that's when you're
on the top of that you're on the top of that puppy um once you get into space you go into this
this schedule of all this stuff that you that you've got to do and you you you you detail in the book
it's it's a great read one thing you you have a little case of nausea while you're up there
a little like c sickness yeah it's they caught s a s space adaptation sickness so it makes you feel a
little nauseated you know one of my crew members lost their cookies you know I didn't I actually
lost them on the way back which is uh one gee a re-adaptation uh but but but uh under way up one of
my crew mates did get get sick to the point they you know they had to throw up but uh but it goes away
you know after a day or so that feeling it's kind of like being in the back of a bus and going
up a mountain curves and all that you kind of feel a little car sick nauseated but then it goes
but then it goes away yeah um fast forward a little bit day three we're about 183 meters away from
the international space station our shuttle began the 360 degree rotation for the purpose of being
photographed using high resolution photography and video by the space station crew they take pictures
from the space station of the space shuttle just to make sure there's no damage on lift off
but that's got to be pretty weird to be up in space and you're 183 yards away from this other big
chunk of metal traveling at 17,000 miles a thousand five miles yeah yeah but but that was one of
the new um procedures as a result of the Columbia accident that we put is that uh we would you know
before we talked to the station we would reach a certain distance stop do a holding pattern there
and then we would do a maneuver where we would show our belly to them and as we're showing our
belly they're filming everything of course uh down linking it to the uh engineers down on a ground
looking at that leading uh wing edge and any other type of things that other damage I could have
occurred to your TPS system which is your thermal protection system which is the underbelly
and the wing leading edge of the of the shuttle that that we uh we investigate inspect uh
the docking you call it a collision in here so it says a collision or soft dock that's got to be crazy
too you're aiming the space shuttle at that thing and you're gonna have like a connect yeah you're
gonna connect and I'll tell you um it was even kind of crazy a little bit more crazy for us than normal
because um you know nothing real big happened in terms of malfunctions during our mission except this
one thing and um the shuttle has um built in jets to maneuver in space including the ohms
engine orbital maneuvering system those are the big engines that we fire the slow down so that we
can get back into the atmosphere but we don't use those for docking we have built in jets that are
on the nose the tail and near the wings of the uh of the shuttle and they fire to maneuver
in space and um and we have two types we have the regular call RCS jets reaction control system jets
and then we've got the verneers which are the fine tuning jets they're kind of like the small ones
they're one tenth the thrust the big ones and so when as you as you're docking to the station
you use the rough ones the RCS and then as you get in you switch to the fine ones so you could
do the fine tuning so that you can dock because the the pilot the both pilots have are at the
controls I'm at the station as flight engineer giving them uh and they're using um they have a
target so they have a um they camera systems so they're looking at that the camera one's looking
outside and then I'm looking at the screens giving them speed uh I give in them uh distance uh and
and then also whether they're in plane or out of plane in terms of I give them numbers to
indicate that if if it's all zeros it means they're coming in plane and then if it's a different number
I give them so that they can provide some type of correction and they're doing all that but as I
mentioned as you get closer you switch over to the fine jets which move you very little but our fine
jets fail so there's no vernier jets so we got the big honking rough you know course jets that we can
do so now our our our our commander CJ Sturk out of the good marini is um you know when you when you
move a a vernier jet you know you move very little but when you move when you do the regular RCS
jets it goes like that right and so what he has to do is he's looking at the at the approaching speed
he's looking at the at this but now he has to time his firing so that when he fires it
as it goes it hits at the middle and and we practice that during uh during because we practice everything
so we practice so we've done that before but the fact is that you know that was probably one of the
pucker moments we had and saying yeah we we get this right because if not you you could damage the
docking mechanism you could get stuck or or you could just bounce off kind of thing so but but he did well
I mean you like the good marina pilot that he is you're fine yeah you get docks um sleeping up there
that sounds like it's a strange experience you got to like tie yourself into a sleeping bag base exactly
you what happens you got to tie the four corners of your sleeping bag to structure and then you
got to slide in and and you zip yourself up the the the the sleeping bags have holes so you can
stick your hands out and the weirdest thing is you don't need a pillow because your your your your
head doesn't bob right there's no weight yeah your hands whatever position your hands are
that's how you're sleeping you know got this cool Frankenstein pictures of my crewmates like that
because that's the way you sleep I mean whatever position you're in you're gonna sleep in that position
but I'll tell you it was the weirdest feeling going to sleep the first in second night but after that
I said you know this is the best sleep you can ever you know no tempered
you mattress nothing mattress mac and Houston can sell with respect to his mattresses
this is the best sleeping gear because you got no pressure us you have no pressure points
what's the what's the how many hours would you get to sleep for you get to sleep but it was on the
average about six hours and ten minutes and that's what why my sleep thing said about six hours
ten minutes on day eight you got this in here the eight day of the mission was very special one
for me Jose the interview is set up and ready you have four minutes and thirty seconds to do it
I was told I was delighted to hear Carlos a famous Mexican reporter who had been following my
story for some time truth be told I was terrified at the thought of knowing that millions of
people in Latin America were going to see my interview it was only after I returned and
conversed with him that I found out he felt the same way this was a historic interview as it was
the first live interview from space conducted in Spanish the minutes went by so quickly
that I felt my time was up just as I was getting started we we talked about the view of Mexico
from space including the attractive coast of the state of Quintana Rue and the Yucca temple
peninsula we also spoke about my inability to detect burp borders that defied Earth into countries
there are no borders from what I can see up here our world leaders should see how beautiful
and precious our world looks from this perspective I said to the reporter
one world from up there yeah you know interesting story in there Jaco with respect to what
happened after that you know I I basically said you know the the most beautiful
thing there was two things that to take away is the first one had to do with put you just mentioned
is that I was able to see Canada the US and Mexico but what struck me in awe and as so beautiful
is that we couldn't I couldn't differentiate where Canada ended the US began or where the US ended
in Mexico began and this ahamom and I said man I had to go out of this world to come to this conclusion
that down there were all just one because borders are human-made concepts designed to separate us
and how sad because from my perspective we're just one down there and it'd be great to have our
world leaders give to give them this opportunity because I'll show you a world be much better now
the thing that what the news got out of all this when I came home and you can look up
the New York Times and the LA Times came up with the headlines saying Mexican American astronaut
wants to open borders that's what they got out of this my star I say good good but everything has to be
politicized they want to get people to click on those headlines exactly and and which I found
it so sad because I said yeah I wasn't talking about that I was just talking about the concept that
we're just one down there you know and but somehow from there they got the fact that I wanted to
remove all borders and get let everybody come into the US what can I say that's the that's the
media for you yeah so again I'm gonna I'm gonna skip forward to get to read the book to get
some of these details about the flight day 14 on this day we made a final preparations to begin the
de-orbit procedures this included closing our payload bay doors and once again putting on the orange
LES suits for the entry phase of our flight observing the beauty of the earth from space or
something I have not been able to put into words well not in a way where I have felt I was able
to truly do justice to the spectacular view I felt goosebumps knowing that few people
have had the privilege of looking at our planet from my perspective I marveled at the
bluness of the oceans the whiteness of the clouds at one point I was able to make out the lights
of some cities I can see San Francisco Mexico City in Houston I managed to steal a few more
moments for myself while I while the rest of the crew worked without anyone noticing I made my way
over to a corner and pulled out the crucifix that Adelida gave me and set a prayer let us
Lord see your love in the world forgive us for our wrong doings give us faith to trust in your goodness
forgive our ignorance and weakness give us the power to continue trusting wholeheartedly
and show us what we can do for peace on earth amen
and you guys end up spending an extra time up in space and extra yes the weather was not
cooperating in Florida and flight rules are that if it's more than a couple of rotations around
the earth and you still can't land you postpone it for 24 hours and if it's still bad weather
you go to your second preferred landing site and so you got your second preferred landing site
which was California yes Edward's Air Force Base yeah yeah yeah and which was
kind of nice because you were going to land in California but also your family wasn't going to be there
yes yes my family was waiting for me in in Florida because they wanted to witness the landing in
person and of course once it got canceled they didn't have enough time to fly and meet us over here
at Edward's Air Force Base but I kind of liked it because you know it's California and
I'm landing at Edward's Air Force Base I call it poetic justice because it's it's some 80 miles
from Chino on Terrier where I used to pick strawberries so here here I am coming in with a
you know in a NASA space suit I did a good old American flag on my shoulder and coming in as a
US NASA astronaut when you know 40 years ago I was you know over there picking strawberries
oh man this landing was no joke too I mean you describe it here as each minute past the distance
between our shuttle and earth lesson the planet also grew bigger in size before our very eyes
which meant that we were getting close to the home in my mind I was counting down the minutes
until we were safely on the ground our landing pointed Edward's Air Force Base in California was
a mere dot on our map as discovery darted across the sky at high speed I saw in our instruments
that we broke mock 25 at that point we were traveling at slightly more than 25 times the speed
is sound I could feel the buffeting of this shuttle with the atmosphere and I noticed an orange
glow outside our windows we were definitely in the atmosphere now I noticed gravity slowly taking
its effect as the weight of my helmet attached to my orange LES became heavier
out of 26,000 feet we broke through the cloud layer and I had a good view of the ground
both below us and in front of us by now the shuttle had the characteristics of an airplane
as the aerodynamic surface controls were responding to the commanders input the shuttle slowed
down to normal airplane speeds and behave more like a glider would since it did not have an
active propulsion system during the landing phase of the flight this of course meant we only had
one opportunity to land it our commander in pilot had practiced these landing hundreds if not
thousands of times in simulators and in actual approaches utilizing one of the two planes that have
been modified to be able to fly the shuttle's landing profile at 400 feet with the gear already armed
our pilot Kevin activated the gear down command this poised the wheels of the shuttle for contact
with the surface of the pavement at Edwards Air Force Base in preparation for landing the landing
strip was ready in no time soon thereafter we were literally racing down the landing strip until
the parachute deployed and the pedal breaks slowly brought us to a complete stop
the opening of the shuttle doors reminding me of the times I had to open them to welcome back
the returning astronauts however this time I would be welcomed and indeed we were a welcome
back I was told by one of my class colleagues as he unbuckled my seat we padded one another on the back
once I was able to stand up I exited the shuttle with a smile on my face the seven of us crew
members were beyond ecstatic everything one is planned our mission commander began to congratulate
us and said we did it we couldn't have asked for a better team all of us had to spend an extra
day on the base before we were able to go home as I waited for the moment when I could go back
to Houston I could not fathom the irony of my dream going into space both beginning in and
concluding in the golden state as a boy I dreamed of becoming an astronaut as I picked crops
as a man I would exit the shuttle as an astronaut on a landing strip located just a few miles
from where I grew up picking strawberries it was poetic really there was truly this delightful
symmetry to my life that helped me realize the importance of remaining humble and remembering
where I came from epic and the story goes on here you go on to talk about retiring from NASA
going into the corporate world as an executive you let me tell you a little bit about the retirement
part of it it was a hard decision to to go about and deciding juggle because I'll tell you
I remember when we've got back from from space shortly thereafter they announced the retirement
of the shuttle fleet so they were going to retire the whole space shuttle program I think they had
four or five flights more manifested and then after that program's over and but they had them all
assigned so because they assigned about four or five crews ahead because they're training already
for the next flight or they're going to get ready to train and so I knew you know since I just
got back I'm in the back of the line right of the queue so I knew I wasn't going to get a
assigned another mission but then I was one of the prime candidates what we were going to be flying
is and we were flying already was with the Russians all right pay the Russians $50 million per
seat and we go up on the Soyuz and they'll take you to the station so so I was one of the prime
candidates because of my background of traveling in Russia for five years in knowing Russian and all
that and I thought okay well I'm going to be one of the first ones I'm down for that out to that
but then you read the fine print and you read the fine print and what you don't realize is that the
training in Russia it's a three year training program and so 80% of the time you're in Russia
and it's not continuous it's like you go six weeks you come back one week you go eight weeks
come back one week you go 12 weeks come back two weeks kind of thing like that for three years
and and then you go up for six months continuous and then when you come back you go on the
road for six months continuous devolving everything all the science you did so and all in all it was
a four year ordeal where you were going to be gone about 90% of the time, 85% of the time
from home and I got five kids my oldest at that time was 15 years old and the youngest was about
seven years old and so I did the map and I said you know all these kids I'm going to miss
you know their you know their boy scout their softball baseball prompts high school graduation
you know this 15 years going to be 19 year already off in college I at least I assume he's going to
go to college I'm not going to be around to find out you're too guide him and so so quickly I think
my Hispanic culture kind of kicked in and and I gave a lot of weight to the family and I'll tell
you man it was the hardest decision in my life because you know we just got through reading
what it took to get here to get there to get assigned and to be part of NASA and after flying only once
here I am considering chucking it all the way because I could fly again but you know I kind of just
thought about it, prayed about it I didn't want to talk to my wife about it because I know her answer is
we can do it we can do it I didn't want her to convince me I said you know this is you know there's
there's a fine line where you know you do it for what you want to do for you and then that fine line
of being more equal testical than you know not considering other folks and so you know I thought
about it thought about it and finally I said you know I think the best thing for me to do is to just
leave give someone else an opportunity you can fly I mean I could stay and not fly but I'm taking
up a billet I said that's not fair either I said it's probably best for me to leave and give someone
else I said give the Johnny's of the world a chance Johnny can't see exactly give the Johnny
Kim's of the world and opportunity so they can fly and so it was the hardest decision
that I could have made but you know I look back at it and I look at world my kids are right in
life right now all college graduates my young seven year old is a freshman in mechanical engineering
at UC Merced you know the PhD my three girls have their bachelor's one of them is finishing
our masters in me and one of them is a big influencer in in in TikTok you know maybe and if you
guys really want to have a laugh because I come on a lot she feels me a lot go at the Vanessa Hernandez
okay and you'll see you'll see her you'll see me make a full of myself but you know anything
for my daughter you know if you're not doing TikTok dances are you or are you oh you got to look at
it man all kinds of stuff I'm telling you all kinds of she graduate from the you truly will do anything
for your family exactly to talk to him is she graduate from La Yola Merimont and she works for a
vitamin pharmaceutical company near La Yola Merimont so she still lives in the LA area and
but she's been she's been you know doing social media stuff and she's gonna start her own podcast
too today already contacted her before just start but but she's been doing good on TikTok and she
she represents a few companies in TikTok and she's I think she's banking more on TikTok than she
isn't her day job you know and working a lot less so but yeah but it's those decisions you know
that I think you know I really you know I look back at it and I don't regret it because I look
at how my kids turn out because I've been here for them and I continue to be there for them
and so I think I made the right decision well that's definitely a difficult decision to make I know
I was in the military and that's the the decision that military individuals like myself have to
make at some point are you gonna keep going you're gonna keep going on the point you're
you're talking about missing all those things I missed all those things I missed everything you know
and eventually had to say I owe I owe a little something I've done what I can for the country I owe
something that's the family that I've left behind for months and months and months and months at a time so
that's I agree the that's you know people ask me what's the toughest decision you ever made in the
military and they think I'm gonna say some tactical situation or some mission it was like no
deciding to get out was the thing that I fought the most about and it was the hardest decision I had to
make and then people tell me well didn't you know you could go on in why did you go on in the
first place I said no that the rules were changed midstream I mean they decided to retire the
space shuttle fleet I mean I I thought the space shuttle fleet you know they told me it was
gonna be going on for another 10 20 years and I would have got another three four flights under my belt
but when you take that away and they say hey the only gaming townhouse with the Russians for the next
10 years I figured you know I think it's time for me to leave then if you guys change the rules and
I value my family as much as I do and I think they need me at this point in their life pre-teenage
years I mean that's the most important part of a kid's growing up stage and you know I think
it's a job where both parents have to be present and you know thumbs on on them to make sure
that they just like my parents were with me make sure that they're you know on the straight
narrow go ahead and in the right direction yeah and then you ended up getting a job in in the
corporate world you ended up running for Congress yes yes I get I get I get I get I get
uh come vent well they convinced me to run for Congress and it was uh you know that's a long story
in itself too but but it was at the urging of president Obama you know he he sought me out not once
not twice but three times and when you get sought out the third time your commander and chief
straight out tells you the first two times he says you ought to consider it and the third time he
says he he told me and I quote I'm gonna make the ask that said please run for Congress in California
so when the commander and chiefs there's at you in the eyes and says run for Congress what you do
you salute the flag and so so I did you know I gave it my best we we were um they didn't put me in my
district because my district is I'm a Democrats or my district is heavy Democrat but we already had
someone there that had seniority so why why not call for a seniority level Democrat and put a
freshman there why not go after a Republican seat so they sent me next door at the time they
were plus 11 in registration and we lost by one and a half points so we almost made it but
but it left the bad taste in the mouth you know I have the exam imagine the taste that left in your
right yeah politics you know it's kind of like you know I just don't have you know I have the
stomach for a lot of things but but when it's stuff like that it's kind of like there's no rules
and you know there's a script I mean it's just like no ethics at all and I said you know that's not me
so one shot was enough at that one I think for now never say never never say never jockel but
but but for now it's it's I think I'm doing okay where I'm at right now yeah um now you know you
to go around you know you do speaking events right now and and you talk about that a little bit
of here now I want to close out you know we've covered some of the book but I wanted to close out
the book with this this little section where you talk about what you talk about you say I share with
everyone the magical recipe for success that I applied to my own life is a recipe that I learned
from my parents and I also shared here with you one identify your golden life two realize and
understand how far you are away from that goal three develop a road map to get there don't skip steps
for get yourself a good education consistent with your goal five develop a good work ethic
and put your heart into reaching your goal six and this is the one you added you mentioned earlier
exemplify perseverance never give up on your dream and remember that it is the journey
not the destination that is of most importance then you continue on these are not the steps to become
an astronaut these are the steps to harvest your own stars the recipe works for anyone in any
part of the world and trust me it's in fallible so that's what you go around talking about yes
I'm a motivational speaker and I share my story and also that recipe and talk and talk about what
what it took to get there and like a good engineer I try to try to basically capture it in a
formula type of environment like the recipe that you just read off there I also give a three
element strategy that says hey to reach your goal you've got to you've got to and this I learned
afterwards right is you got to know what the minimum requirements are once you define your goal
is natural tendency and 99.9% of us get this right is you ask yourself what are the requirements
to get there you want to be a doctor you know you got to go to medical pre-med medical school
and pass the boards lawyer pre-law law passed the bar astronaut you know you got to go to the
STEM field get graduate degree four or five years experience and then start applying so that's the
first one everyone gets that one you know it's it's no the requirement second one is emulate
successful people that you want to aspire to be like in other words you know ask yourself
what do they have that I don't have you know if you want to be a CEO study a CEO and study find
out how they got there you want to be an astronaut study an astronaut I mean that's what I did after
my six our failure remember I'd compare myself I found out they were all pilots so what did I
do I invested in myself I became a pilot then I found out they were all school but certified what did
I do I invested in myself and became school certified the third stage of that of that strategy
is is you got to create a differentiator in other words differentiate yourself from
differentiate yourself from the competition you know at that the time you know it was from 4,000
and went up to 12,000 that I had a differentiate myself so it was no accident that I took that
job going to Russia it was strategic in my career I say it's going to help my career obviously
but it's also going to help me over here because you know I just read that the US and the newly
form Russia signing agreement to build what was going to be the international space station so
he didn't take a rocket scientist to figure out even though I am one you are one you know I am one
I didn't take a rocket scientist figure out we were going to be working with the Russians
so my great differentiator is during these next five years in this project I'm like I traveled
more than 25 times through the Russian Siberian countryside and work with the Russians and all this
you know help me get the upper hand on the other 14, 12,000 applicants
because very few of them could save or claim similar experience than what I had and at least that
got me in the door to get started getting interviewed and then the rest I would just sell myself
so yeah so that's the three element strategy that I had up up to that and so that's what you're
doing now now you got your foundation the reaching the stars foundation yes that AstroJH.org
you'll see everything we do in the Central Valley where we try to motivate kids to get interested
in STEM careers science technology engineering math we have a summer academy at the University of
Pacific same school I went to where we have kids from the seventh to 12th grade in the six week
summer program where we basically inundate them with STEM concepts fun STEM concepts that they can
take back to their school and get ahead start in their math and science courses they're going to
see the following year so we we basically expose them to those concepts that we know they're
good we know what the core curriculum is so we expose them to those ideas in a fun experimental
experiential way so that when they go back to school they said oh yeah I've seen this it's my
fact I know the experiment and so they do very well and so we we do that for them and then and then
we we also have a science class where we get over a thousand kids in the fifth grade
to in a one day exploratory type of environment where we have all kinds of hands on
experiments we have people from Lawrence live a more lab from Google from Apple come
and they talk about what their careers are and basically you know exposing to STEM careers
and why we do that at fifth grade because that's the age when I decided I want to be an astronaut
so I think if it's good enough for me it's good enough for them and then now whatever
money we have left over because we we sort of have on a year to year budget whatever
money we really have left over we give scholarships to the kids so no that's awesome I know
you know that's what American needs American needs kids that are growing up that want to
learn STEM yes we need lots of engineers scientists yeah that's that's the that's the competition
for you shine is and shine is are all India are kicking our butts and producing more scientists
and engineers than we are and that's gonna cost us yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
and 10 years from now 20 years from now it's gonna cost us if we don't if we don't
rectify the situation yeah I know I I can find myself sometimes being pretty down on the
academia right for people that are going to the debt and they're they're born all this money
to go to college but they get a degree that doesn't really give them a job you know they'll
get a degree in something that doesn't you can't go you don't have a skill set I mean engineering
is a skill set yeah something that you learn something you not to do so the fact that you're doing
that that that program is leaning kids in the right direction for something that can actually
provide not only them with a good career but also provides America with something that we desperately
need and we're just we're gonna need even more in the future and on top of all that you also have
a winery right well well first of all you know all that is just volunteer you know we I get
nothing happening right except but you still have to put it together yeah yeah yeah it's a
time scene yeah right but unpaid time scene I'll say on top of all the time you spend doing that
and all the time you spend speaking you also but before the winery I also have a engineering consulting
this case first yeah I have a Tierra Luna engineering where I do aerospace consulting you know for
example I help Mexico a buy and launch three communications satellites from Boeing Corporation
I was at 1.2 billion dollar purchase for Mexico and they hired me because the under secretary
of communications was he himself at midday he says look I'm an economist politician economist I
know did least quite about satellites and here we are spending 1.2 billion dollars can you help us so
I worked on a neat project for about four years helping them launch three communications satellites
so they they can have internet throughout all of Mexico any population over 5,000 the
government put a dish so they would have connectivity to the outside world which is which is
pretty neat so I do that you know I've also helped a university build a Cube set small satellite
10 by 10 by 10 centimeters and with NASA we launched it for free for them and they became the first
university in Mexico to have built design and keyword operated their own satellite from space
so we did that for them I'm helping I also created an aerospace curriculum for them
working with a three campus university in northern Mexico and that's Tierra Luna engineering
work which by the way if you go to the dot com store there Tierra Luna engineering dot com
you can actually get the book reaching for the stars you can get the children's book there
and you can buy an Amazon and quite frankly you can probably buy a little cheaper but if you buy
it through our website you'll guarantee that I can sign it and dedicate whatever you want me to say on it
I'll dedicate it and the proceeds go to my foundation so that's why I want to make sure you
clarify that you know I think it's like 30 bucks for the book or something like that but it's signed
by me and we send it off and so you can do that at Tierra Luna engineering dot com and then as
if that wasn't enough I kind of come full circle and my wife wanted a back to the field exactly
my wife wanted a home out in the country and so about five years ago you know when we were
well down and established back in stockton I started looking for some property because yeah you
happy wife happy life right and so I started looking for some from property so that we can build a
house out in the country because she wants living in the country and I said yeah okay I'm a country boy too
and man I saw the price and they were expensive and then I ran into this 28 year vineyard
and it was encompassing and it was only about twice as much as an empty three acre lot in the country
too. That's him as a no-brainer I'm gonna I'm gonna become a farmer.
Back to my roots and back to the fields and I became a a grave
farmer and the reason why I was so into it was because first of all I know how to pick grapes
but that's the only thing I know I don't know like did least go out about about running a vineyard
but you know who does my dad my dad's worked in there all his life and so I told pop
that so we can't pop that's that told pop say if I buy this vineyard would you teach me how to
run the vineyard you say yes so these past five years with him you know he's 84 strong
man it's good you know field work background he's strong and healthy you know this is the best
five years I spent with him quality time he's teaching me you know what to fertilize how to fertilize
one water and you know he gets up on the tractor and he plows and mows and all kinds of stuff
that he does it helped me with the vineyard and and and and we sell all the grapes to a winery that
makes a champ it was sparkling wine can caught champagne in California sparkling wine right and
it's it's it's it's corbell so we sell it to them but then they make the mistake of one day
inviting me to see their processes and I saw how they engineered mine starts going on exactly I
started looking at the process of how they make wine and you know my favorite phrases hey this ain't
rocket science I could make this I could make this probably more efficiently to you exactly and so
so I started you know a couple years ago I started working with my own formulations and making my own
wine and finally I settled on three concoctions that that we have and so I started my company again
everything under Tierra Luna members Tierra Luna engineering remember my wife's restaurant and it was
called Tierra Luna grill yeah when we came in California and I opened up Tierra Luna engineering I
handed a dollar to my wife so what's this for I saw I'm buying your naming rights I'll be right
now the funk restaurant because you know we hear you close the down here here's here's the dollar
I'm gonna call Tierra Luna engineering and then after that I opened another company called Tierra Luna
sellers that's with a C C L L A R S sellers dot com and then that's where I I sell my wine now
this is the first year we came out with it it's a direct to consumer and hopefully we'll end up
being in stores and stuff later on when we have production but we're right now we're just
getting it out there and getting it known and and we have you know we have three varieties you know
we have a Sauvignon block which has my grapes so if you want to drink wine from my vineyard
you'll see that Sauvignon block is the one to go and then I buy grapes from Lodai and I make a red
zimfendale which is also good and then I buy grapes from from anapa area and I make a red blend
that's a combination of of Merlot, Tempranillo, Siro and Petizero and we call that the red blend
and then I named them after constellations because the the companies called Tierra Luna sellers
but like the first one I ever made was with my grapes so I call it a new star which is Nova Stella
and in Latin Nova Stella and then the Zimfendale call it Stella Zee, you know Zee constellation
and then the red blend I call it Stella Roja this is red star right and so so but yeah
you know it's it's a great is a great activity I enjoy it you know it's kind of like another challenge
that you know you start from nothing and you create the labels you create the formulation and
I'll send you got this nice bottle and said you know I'm the one that created this this is so cool
and so so it's this is in Joe I love doing this I love doing this yeah that's uh
you're just getting warmed up I guess I guess oh yes yes and and then and then to top it off you know
my son my youngest son I told you it's going to use him or say it right he got accepted to
the University of Pacific and he got accepted to UC Santa Barbara amongst other schools but the
three he liked was UC Santa Barbara University of Pacific and UC Merced and I was certain
he was going to pick Pacific or Santa Barbara but he picks UC Merced and I told him why son
I said why did you pick it's fine I said you go wherever you want but I'm curious why did you pick
UC Merced he said well these are the schools that are student centric in other words they
don't focus too much on research but focus on the students success and so I liked all these three
schools I said with them but why it's some her said well the tipping point was in Pacific
uh it says my brother and you are alumni that's true and at UC Santa Barbara my sister and you are alumni
I said yeah so so you know I'm gonna always be known as you know the brother or the sister or the
son of saying I want to come in form my own you know create my own route that's a one I
respect that I think that's fine so the Friday Saturday we were supposed to move him in
all right and this is a few months back when the semester was starting we were supposed to move
him in this storm and everything and but the Friday before one day before I get a call from
the governor's office and says you've been appointed as a UC Regent so now I'm a UC Regent
you know overseeing the 10 UC campuses the national labs Lawrence Livermore Lab is
fun falls under my purview also so so so so so we go the next day Saturday I thought nothing
I said oh thank you very much I appreciate you say I accept and all that so the following
day I go and with my son and my wife and there we are moving him in and as we're moving him in
along comes the chancellor his assistant the photographer he's taking pictures with my son in the
high because I'm the new Regent you know and my son looks up well he looks down on me because he's
taller me he looks down on me he says I'm never gonna get rid of you and I said no you're not
so so I'm also on the UC board of Regents impressive man impressive well look we're going on
I think over three hours right now three and a half yeah three and a half that time flies
doesn't stop it does indeed that that's probably your typical way in every way anyway yeah around three
some between three before yeah yeah something okay I'm glad I had enough material to at least meet
the norms here you met the minimum required it's just it's a fascinating story and it's just
unbelievably here you got any final questions just an incredible story thanks yeah
thanks for sharing all the lessons from from from your dad and from your story I mean it's just
incredible man thank you yeah oh the one thing I miss young remember I told you not to let me
yes oh yeah yeah miss yeah it's just about to remind you okay don't worry
yeah yeah good good glad I'm glad you reminded me I'm glad you got forgot I've dropped the ball
with miss young you know one of the things is when you go off on the mission you get to invite
a hundred people in the VIP section that's about you know about five six miles from the launch
pads so that's pretty close to and for a Hispanic family it's like okay which of my cousins
aren't coming right who's so hard but but thank god I had Caucasian crewmates I didn't have
had 100 relatives so I was able to siphon off week I was able to siphon off a bunch of tickets
and so I had the school district look up miss young and miss bail now I couldn't look up
missters and they have because he passed away in a car accident but but I I the three most
important teachers and also Mr. Rodriguez he also passed away of cancer so two of two of them were
gone and and and so I looked them up and I had them invited and flown they were sitting next to
my parents both miss bail and miss young we're sitting next to my parents witnessing and
real life there a lot of the space shuttle and and the impact that they had on me you know I thought
that was kind of only right thing to do and try to get them out there and have that experience with us
man outstanding outstanding well you know again thank you so much thank you so much for joining us
thanks for sharing your story thanks for sharing your experiences thanks for sharing your lessons learned
unbelievable lessons learned and and thanks for what you've done for mankind to you know not only
in the medical field and then in the final frontier of space and then on top of that what you're
continuing to do right now with your foundations trying to get out there and get kids pointing
in the right direction you know we talked about what happens when kids get pointed in the wrong
direction we know how that turns out it's horrible and to see someone like you that we're able to
overcome those boundaries and overcome the ultimate boundaries and make it to where you've made it
just so much to learn and I just want to say thanks for coming on and thanks for sharing we appreciate it
well thank you very much and I notice you have a Twitter too right and so I want to invite people to
to get into my Twitter which is Astro underscore Jose so if you guys come and follow me and
you're on Instagram as well how you have that in stroke underscore Jose on Twitter at
Astro underscore Jose once again the foundation is Astro jh.org and then Tierra Luna and
Janerina Luna sellers that's where we can find you yep we can we can either launch satellites
or we can have a glass of wine you got us covered and if you drink enough wine it's probably both
thanks Jose appreciate it thank you jh. those are great being here and thank you for the time and
and you were yeah you were very generous with your time and I'm glad we were able to go over my story
and I hope folks enjoy it and like I said if they want to get some more buy the book and read it
I think it goes well with the glass of wine myself you got us covered thanks Jose all right thank you
and with that Jose Hernandez has left the building man very cool but unbelievable story
everything full circle with that guy everything amazing man just incredible story obviously
he said a high bar on a long journey I was come out of these things being thinking myself well
I better raise the game I better raise the bar I better do a little bit better
I think that's what we I think that's what we all need to do okay doc what he got how can we
raise the game what do we need to do so we're we're raising the game on a strategic level and
a tactical level right all times strategic level technical right check this out so I'm going to
start tactical though and that's jacophil for me RTD go and a can need that hitter tactical solution
right but it doesn't stop there yeah it it serves the the greater goal to right the
most strategic goal which is staying on the path staying healthy not polluting my body with sugar
and freaking chemicals chemicals preserved as adatives right so we're doing both here with the
the jacophil or jacogo RTD cans check get that right right right right he's met all night thinking
that did you know bro speak I just cracked this go about 20 minutes ago and it came to me when
we were talking to Jose man yeah you know he was always he was always moving making little
tactical moves that were serving that greater vision and even you know even when it came to
when he was talking about retiring you know that strategic vision was still you know taking care
of the family he had achieved that that high as goal and now the the vision was to take care of
his family make sure they were good to go to the rock and roll now it's thinking strategic you
get all time and you're right and I started to talk about this with that idea of the of the deviation
right and the acceptance of deviation and how one minute like hey you know it's just one donut
and you just start to accept that you start to accept that you start to accept it don't accept it don't
accept it you got to stay on the freaking path you can't accept these deviations from the path you got
to get and if you deviate look if you deviate get back on it so that's where we're at yeah get you
get get something that's good for you you can drink something that's literally good for you
you don't have to drink something that's poison for your body which seems crazy that in this
day and age we have to tell people hey you don't have to poison yourself but people the the
companies that make this stuff have figured out oh we can get people addicted to sugar we got
them addicted to the rush that they're gonna get and that fake dopamine hit that they're
gonna get and it's all lies and it's literally bad for you you might as well just go
just just hit up the local freaking drug dealer and get some of that meth going that's where you're at
that's what you're doing your body that's what you're doing your mind don't do it instead get
something that's literally good for you hundred percent and and I've got I've got friends who
who are addicted addicted to energy drinks and and thus addicted to everything that comes
along with that energy drink and it is but it can lead to catastrophic failure right we don't want
to do that so Jack ago RTD we also have joint warfare super cruel oil discipline powder we've also
got the new pre workout got that in the sniper flavor if you do now just just straight just
just drew the dry what do they call it dry dry scoop and dry he's dry scooping that and now I
seen other people just dry Jason it with a cell yeah get that stuff the joint warfare
the super cruel it's that's how you're gonna I'd out seal buddy of mine call me the other day
he goes hey bro I got ask you question he's my it's I went through bugs with this matter fact
and he was like a are you sore every day or is that what's going on I go hey man you got the
I go you got joint warfare he goes yeah I go you got super curly goes yeah and I go and you're sore
you go yeah and I go well quick and play that I go there's that's as good as you're gonna get like
you say you're getting a little older but you don't want to go off that stuff you got to get that
smoke if if you're still sore bro if that's that muscle soreness the doms get on that
maltrain get on the way you with that we got we got by the way speaking of milk I just got to
mention this it's hot milk season because it's a winter time even in California it gets
little it's a little cool the morning time right so you got to and this is the key point
is you got to warm the milk first don't put milk in milk and then warm it up you got to
warm the milk then put the milk in I'll do an instructional video as we approach the
I've never done hot milk oh bro it's like hot chocolate but it's good for you
so yeah stand by for that instructional video you're good to go yeah so get yourself some milk
whatever flavor do you want vitamin D 3 there you should well a hundred percent beyond that
four year life same thing with cold war oh oh it's it's winter time there's germs around cool
just crush them with cold war we're fighting back on this side back on the side all day long
look you can get this stuff at vitamin shop you get all of the vitamin shop you can get the drinks
at wall walk okay to wall walk just just clear the shelves you can also get it from jockelfuel.com
and if you subscribe to any of these things which is a good call on multiple fronts it first
of course it's a good call on the health front because now you don't wake up sore and broken because
you miss joint warfare you don't go to bed with a with a craving in your stomach because you didn't
have any milk left don't let that happen just subscribe and that's one front health front
other front is financial front if you subscribe to something we're paying the shipping homes
we're here for you get that free freight get free freight so there you go another thing that we've
got is well we got origin main origin USA origin USA dot com we're making stuff you see my post the other
day we're making stuff we're making jeans we're making boots we're making geese for that you
get to we're making sweatshirts hats just what what you need what that's what you what you need
rash guards what you need we're making it we're gonna safety take tow boot now we got work heavy duty
work pants just what you need and it's all made in America and it's not just made this is the thing
I'm I'm big on this right now the the made in America thing not not just made in America but what
origin is doing right now in America bringing manufacturing back to not just main now but North Carolina
too where where origin is in North Carolina is 30 minutes from where I grew up that's huge man
to know that down the road there are kids in my hometown right now that can go get a job at origin
are you freaking kidding me I'm fired up not just made in the USA originated because the material
originated in America the workers originated it's is American made and it's how we're gonna win
the economic war absolutely there you go check it out origin USA dot com get some stuff get some stuff
away it's Christmas time get some stuff for Christmas hey what if you could get a gift for your friend
family member whatever you could get them a gift and you could give America a gift of support
what if you made their future better because you bought something that was American made I'm just saying
the options there you don't have to buy something from a communist you don't have to do that you can
you can you can but you don't have to jack jack called me out in Austin straight up saw my
jeans wasn't wearing oh was it man yeah what he was like he was like hey you know we got a company
that makes those in America I was like oh it burned me up right so I got full benefit from that
black Friday deal at origin tell you what Delta 68's inbound check all right so there you go
origin USA dot com go get some we also have our own store jacco store dot com we've got the
discipline equals freedom shirts on there rash guards t shirts hats bannies it is officially hoody
season yeah I think we can all agree when you're going hot milk you're in your hoodie season hot
of the whole hoodie season squat season that's what we're doing we've got hoodies there we've got women's
gear we've got warrior kids soap made by aiden out there getting effort Irish Oaks farms jacco soap
out here stand clean we've also got the shirt locker my brother echo Charles making my brother echo
Charles the big ones at the other guy that here sometimes echo Charles is making a new shirt every
month and they are certified legit shirts uh we were just at the jacco live saw you know troopers
out there with the more past shirt on with the jacco ride and the tank I mean just all of all of these
awesome shirts get on the shirt locker again subscription situation there subscribe to this podcast
on iTunes google play stitch or wherever you listen to um leave reviews man they are hilarious
and jacco reads them and they're awesome yeah sometimes sometimes it's cool you know good but
sometimes they're funny I haven't done a I haven't done a review on a while I'm reading one of
us I need to get back on that train also we have the jacco unraveling that I do with my friend
Darrell Cooper DC we have the grounded podcast which we haven't recorded along I mean that thing
dead what are we doing you know we need to get it undead yeah we all are doing you jacco we talk about
just so I need to hit record got a jacco shirt yeah we got to jacco shirt yeah we got to jacco
t-shirts on jacco store.com so we'll get back to that grounded podcast we have the warrior kid
podcast for the warrior kids out there we also have jacco underground.com as you know look there's situations
where we we have been banned in certain scenarios you don't like that at all I probably got banned today
possibly because I told people to get off their phones get get off fight the algorithm fight the algorithm
how happy do you think that algorithm controllers are when they hear that I bet you that thing gets
beat down and freaking out the arms go on on a tige yeah they have like freaking alerts going off
and in brain control mind control brain wash central they're like hey we got a rebel here so you
can put down pack yeah they're fighting against the algorithm so look we don't know what's going
to happen we we push against the algorithm hard enough algorithms is going to push back they'll
push us right off but guess what we'll be okay we'll be standing by at jacco underground.com
where we have we have a little oasis set up it costs eight dollars and eighteen cents a month but
if you can't afford it that's okay email assistance at jacco underground.com and and we do a podcast
we do a separate podcast on there kind of like as a thank you it's a thank you q and a answer
about q and a talk about some other subjects that are tangential to what we talk about on jacco
podcast but most important it just is a contingency in case something goes haywire and we have to
abandon the major platforms okay we'll be in jacco underground.com you can also find us on youtube
jacco podcast youtube channel subscribe there got some great videos up of the podcast where you can
see what jacco and echo and eye and or guess look like hey so no ragging so look when echo
can you explain that when I talk about being the a-ding and kind of coming through at the critical
moments and and so what heck was done the good to have come move he's made it seem like that's funny
ha ha he was he was like he went with that to make it seem like yeah jacco is just kidding because
he doesn't want he doesn't want to say the truth which is as you know at the critical junctures
at the critical junctures there's usually a little bit of like you know that that little connective
tissue right hey look echo brings he brings the major bulk of the of the muscle mass to the scenario
but that achilles tendon you got it got to get right so the assistant director myself let's face
sometimes I got to come in with a big win you've seen it I've seen it but I will also say
I will also say the echo Charles is open-minded in these scenarios he's right up luckily he's humble enough
and he knows he doesn't push back when that when we're in fact when the assistant director comes in
it makes a suggestion echo Charles is humble enough to say yeah jacco's right again open-minded open-minded
for sure but we so we've got those videos up on our YouTube channel origin also has an amazing
uh YouTube channel where they show you what it's like to bring manufacturing back to America
uh check them out on YouTube as well we've also got psychological warfare uh which is an album with
tracks of jacco helping you out of moments of weakness um highly recommended there that's the
fundamentals you want to get reps in on the fundamentals go hit psychological warfare uh hi oh another one
of those albums which is the way I know I'm told I gotta prioritize next keep that uh if you want
something cool to hang on your wall don't worry the code of my I was got you covered cool stuff
to hang on your wall which is all you need to say comes from Dakota Meyer and it's cool stuff
to hang on your wire wall check up flipside canvas dot com order something for yourself made in
America by the way also got some books final spin get I can't say too much about it but let's
let's face it if you haven't read final spin you want to you probably need to go get that go get
that there you go there's your advice leaders of strategy and tactics field manual the code the
evaluation the protocols discipline equals freedom field manual way the warrior kid one two three and
four that's what I'm trying to do kids are out there they need those books they need to be on the
path they need to get steered straight unlike Carlos now bear to insert you that you heard about
on this podcast today get the kids on the path way the warrior kid one two three four
there's Christmas there's a life changing Christmas is that a bold statement no it's not actually
life changing Christmas get way of the warrior kid one two three and four for all the kids that you
know making investment every kid that you know get them all four of those books change their life
get them on the path if you got little kids get them liking the dragons best little kids books
ever extreme ownership that caught me of leadership that are real with my brother Dave Babin don't
forget about about face by Colonel David Hackworth I wrote the forward on the new addition we have a
leadership consultancy it's called echelon front we solve problems through leadership no matter what's
going on leadership is the solution leadership is the solution go to echelon front dot com for details
there can also come to one of our live events we have the master we have field training exercise we have
eF battlefield we have the next master is in Dallas Texas March 24th and 25th if you want to
come and get some of that we also have an online training program called extreme ownership academy
leadership is not something you just learn and you're good it's not like that it's something that
you have to train in constantly it's something that you have to work on constantly it's something that
you improve on all the time it's a perishable skill by the way so that's why we created
the extreme ownership academy go to extreme ownership dot com I'm on there three times a week
two times a week four times a week answering questions you want to talk to me feel like I'd really
like to meet charcoal just go on there that's that's the other thing about this leadership skill
is that it helps to have a guiding you know a guiding hand a mentor you know somebody who knows
what they're talking about helping you along the path you guys do that three times a week
you and life you know on a live event you know JP Dave the echelon front instructors guiding you
through this stuff I mean it's a no-brainer yep that's it go to extreme ownership dot com coming hang out
come and learn and if you want to help service members active and retired you want to help their
families gold star families check out mark least mom momily she's got a charity organization
doing all kinds of awesome stuff for veterans if you want to donate only want to get involved
go to america's mighty warriors dot org and if you want well if you want more of my um what is
it marathon mumbling just what i seem to do if you want more of carries inquisitive inquiries well
then you can go on the interwebs on twitter on instagram and on facebook carries at carry
underscore helpton i am at jocca willink and also don't forget that at astro underscore Jose
is where you can reach Jose Hernandez and also he has the reaching for the stars foundation
astro jh dot org so you can check that out as well and then as you heard him say he's got tera luna
and tera luna sellers tera luna sellers dot com tera luna engineering was an engineering engineering
up to your luna engineering dot com if you want to get some help getting into space or you want to
drink some wine Jose's got you covered which is awesome and for all those men women out there
right now in the army navy air force marines thank you for keeping us safe here on earth
and also thanks to our police law enforcement firefighters paramedics and EMT's dispatchers
correction officers board of patrol secret service and all first responders thanks for keeping
us safe here at home and to everyone else out there remember remember Jose Hernandez his family
give us an incredible example of what hard work and persistence 12 years of persistence by
the way persistence can do for us and he gave us a simple plan to fall identify or go identify
where you are in relation that goal map out a way to get there educate yourself thoroughly around
that goal put in the work people don't want to hear about that step put in the work
working at a cannery from 10 o'clock at night till 6 o'clock in the morning
then go on a class at nine in the morning getting two and a half hours of sleep when you get
to home from school going back to the cannery that's put in work that's put in work and finally
never give up persistence persistence persistence persistence persistence 12 rejection letters I guess
it was 11 rejection letters got it on the 12th 11 rejection letters 11 years of rejection
and what am I doing what can I do how can I get better where can I improve and on top of all
that listen it's the journey it's the process it's the track it's the voyage that are the most
important part and if if you go on that path even if you don't make it to the end of the path
if you go on that path look at how much further you are along in life look about how much
better you have improved as a human being so relish the struggle and even relish when you come
up short which you will that's part of it keep reaching keeps scratching and no matter what
but keep getting after it and until next time this is Carrie and Jaco out.